inspiration, out. — During the piano playing I sat askew behind you, you had crossed one leg over the other and plucked several times at your coiffure, which in front view I cannot imagine to myself and of which I know only from the time of that piano playing that it stood out a little at the side. — Later, to be sure, a great distraction of the company had set in, Frau Brod was dozing on the canapé, Herr Brod was busying himself at the bookcase, Otto was struggling with the fire-screen. There was talk of Max’s books, you said something about Arnold Beer, mentioned a review in Ost und West and finally said, while you were leafing through a volume of the Propyläen edition of Goethe’s works, that you had also begun “Schloß Nornepygge,” but had not been able to read it to the end. At this remark I actually froze, for myself, for you and for everyone. Was it not a useless, inexplicable insult? And yet you carried this apparently unrescuable thing through to the end like a heroine, while we all looked at your head bent over the book. It turned out that it was no insult, indeed not even the slightest judgment, but only a fact at which you yourself were astonished, for which reason you also intended, when the occasion offered, to take up the book again. That could not have been more beautifully resolved and I thought we could all be a little ashamed before you. — For a change the Herr Director brought the picture volume of that Propyläen edition and announced that he would show you Goethe in underpants. You quoted: “He remains a king even in underpants,” and this quotation was the only thing that had displeased me in you that evening. From this displeasure I felt almost a pressure in my throat and really ought to have asked myself what led me to such participation. But I am altogether imprecise. — The speed with which at the end you darted out of the room and came back in boots I could not grasp at all. The comparison with a gazelle, however, which Frau Brod made twice, did not please me. — Quite exactly I still see how you put on the hat and stuck in the pins. The hat was fairly large, underneath it was white. In the street I immediately fell into one of my not exactly rare twilight states, in which I recognize nothing clearly except my own worthlessness. In Perlgasse you asked me, perhaps in order to help along my painful silence, where I lived and of course wanted to hear whether my way home and the way to your hotel coincided or not, but I, unhappy blockhead, asked in return whether you wanted to know my address, evidently in the assumption that you, hardly arrived in Berlin, would at once write to me with fiery zeal about the Palestine journey and did not want to expose yourself to the desperate situation of then perhaps not having my address immediately at hand. What I had contrived there then of course confused me still on the further way, insofar as there was then anything in me to confuse. — Already upstairs in the first room and again in the street there had been talk of a gentleman from your Prague branch, with whom in the afternoon you had been on the Hradschin in a carriage. This gentleman seemed to me to make it impossible to come early to the station with flowers, which for some time had hovered before me in uncertain resolutions. The early hour of your departure, the impossibility of getting flowers so soon, made the renunciation easier for me. — In Obstgasse and on the Graben it was chiefly Herr Director Brod who held the floor and you told only that story, how your mother has the house door opened for you at your clapping of hands, a story, by the way, for which you still owe me an explanation. Otherwise the time was shamefully dawdled away with comparisons between Prague and Berlin traffic. It was also mentioned, if I am not mistaken, that you had taken your afternoon snack in the Representative House opposite your hotel. Finally Herr Brod gave you advice about your journey and named several stations where you would get something to eat. You intended to breakfast in the dining car. Now I also heard that you had forgotten your umbrella in the train and this trifle (for me a trifle) brought me a new manifoldness into your image. — That you had not yet packed and indeed still wanted to read in bed made me uneasy. The night before you had read until 4 o’clock in the morning. As travel reading you had with you: Björnson: “Flags over Town and Harbor” and Andersen: “Picture Book without Pictures.” I had the impression that I could have guessed these books, which

I of course would not have brought off in my life. On entering the hotel I pressed myself, in some sort of embarrassment, into the same compartment of the revolving door in which you were going, and almost bumped against your feet. — Then all three of us stood for a little while before the waiter by the lift, in which you were immediately to disappear and whose door was already being opened. You still held a little, very proud speech with the waiter, the sound of which I — if I pause — still have in my ears. You did not easily let yourself be talked out of the idea that no carriage was necessary to the nearby station. To be sure, you thought you would be leaving from the Franz-Josefs-Bahnhof. — Then we took the last farewell and I mentioned, in the most awkward manner possible, once more the Palestine journey, as indeed at that moment it seemed to me that already during the whole evening I had mentioned this journey far too often, which probably no one took seriously except me.

These are, approximately, with only small unessential, though still quite numerous omissions, all the external events of that evening which I can still remember today, after probably more than 30 other evenings which I have in the meantime spent with the Brod family and which unfortunately may have blurred many things. I have written them down in order to answer your remark that on that evening little notice had been taken of you, and then also because I have already for far too long resisted the desire to write down, for once, the memories of that evening, insofar as they are still present. But now you see with horror this mass of written paper, curse first that remark which has caused it, curse then yourself, who is supposed to read all this, then perhaps, out of a slight curiosity, read it after all to the end, while your tea grows completely cold, and finally come into such a bad temper that, by all that is dear to you, you swear not under any circumstances to want perhaps to supplement my memories from your own, though in your anger you do not consider that supplementing does not make so much trouble as the first writing-down and that by supplementing you would give me a much greater pleasure than I have succeeded in giving you by this first gathering of the material. — But now you may really have peace from me and only be most cordially greeted. Your Franz K. Still no end and even a question difficult to answer: How long can one keep chocolate without its spoiling?

Gracious Miss! Now comes something very important, even if only in great haste. (It is no longer written in the office, for my office work revolts against the writing to you, so alien to me is this work through and through and has no notion of what I need.) You must therefore not believe that through an endless letter like the one of the day before yesterday, on account of which I have already reproached myself enough, I want, besides the time of reading, also to take from you the time of resting and to oblige you to large and punctual answers, I should indeed have to be ashamed if, in addition to your strenuous working days, I were to come along as the nuisance of your evenings. So that is not what my letters want, that they do not want at all, but in the end that is self-evident and you will not have understood it otherwise either. Only you should not — and this is the important thing — and this is the important thing (so important is it that in my haste it becomes a litany to me) — in the evenings write to me any longer even if, without regard to my letters, you yourself should have an independent desire to write. However beautiful I imagine it in your office — are you alone in a room? — I no longer want to have the feeling of having kept you there until late into the evening. Five lines, yes, that you could certainly write me now and then in the evenings, whereby, despite all resistance, I cannot suppress the crude remark that one can write 5 lines more often than long letters. The sight of your letters in the doorway — they come

now toward midday — could make me forget all consideration for you, but the reading of the indication of the time or the suspicion that I am perhaps cheating you out of a walk is again unbearable too. Have I then the right to advise you against Pyramidon, if I am partly to blame for your headaches? When do you actually go walking then? Twice a week gymnastics, three times the Professor — it must be the lost letter in which you wrote of him what then remains of free time? And on Sunday still needlework, why that then? Can that please your mother, if she knows that you have to use your time of recuperation for it? Especially since, according to your letters, your mother seems to be your best and merry friend. — If only you would reassure me about all this in five lines, so that we would no longer have to write and think about it, but could look at and listen to one another without self-reproaches and calmly, you according to your goodness and insight, I, as I must. Your Franz K.

(Letterhead of the Workers’ Accident Insurance Institute) 31.X.12

Gracious Miss!

Just see how many impossibilities there are in our writing. Can I take from a request like that one, that you should write me only 5 lines, the appearance of repulsive, untrue magnanimity? That is impossible. And do I not mean this request sincerely? Certainly I mean it sincerely. And do I not perhaps also mean it insincerely? Naturally I mean it insincerely, and how insincerely I mean it! When a letter is finally there, after the door of my room has opened a thousand times in order, instead of admitting the servant with the letter, to admit a multitude of people who, with a calm expression of face that torments me in this respect, feel themselves to be here in the right place, where after all only the servant with the letter and no one else has a right to appear, when then, therefore, this letter is there, then I believe for a little while that now I can be calm, that I shall sate myself on it and that the day will pass well. But then I have read it, there is more in it than I may ever demand to be able to learn, you have used your evening for the letter and there remains perhaps scarcely any time for the walk through Leipziger Straße, I read the letter once, put it away and read it again, take a file in my hand and yet actually read only your letter, stand by the typist to whom I am supposed to dictate, and again your letter passes slowly through my hand and I have scarcely drawn it out, people ask me about something or other and I know quite exactly that I should not now be thinking of your letter, but it is also the only thing that occurs to me — but after all this I am hungry as before, restless as before, and already again the door begins to move merrily, as if the servant with the letter were already to come again. That is the “little joy” which, according to your expression, your letters give me. With this your question is also answered, whether it is not disagreeable to me to receive a letter from you every day at the office. Naturally it is an almost impossible thing to bring the receiving of a letter from you and office work into any sort of connection, but just as impossible is it to work and wait in vain for a letter, or to work and consider whether perhaps there is a letter lying at home. Impossibilities on all sides! And yet it is not so bad, for in recent times other impossibilities too have succeeded for me with office work, one must not throw oneself down before the smaller impossibilities, one would, after all, never get the great impossibilities into sight. Today, however, I may not complain at all, for your two last letters came to me separated only by an interval of two hours, and I have of course cursed the disorderliness of the post for yesterday just as much as I praise it for today.

But I do not answer at all and hardly ask anything and all only because the joy of writing to you, without my becoming aware of it at once, lays out all letters to you from the start for the endless, and there of course nothing actual has to be said on the first sheet. But wait, tomorrow I shall hopefully (I hope for myself) have enough time to answer all questions in one go and to ask so many questions that at least for the moment my heart will be lighter. Today I say only this, that at the passage in the letter which dealt with your hat, I bit my tongue. So it was black underneath? Where had I my eyes? And the observation was by no means insignificant to me. But then it was above entirely white and that may have confused me, since because of my height I was looking down on it. You also bent your head a little when you put the hat on. In short there are excuses as always, but what I did not know quite exactly, I should not have written. With the most heartfelt greetings and a kiss of the hand, if it is permitted. Your Franz K.

1.XI.12 Dear Miss Felice! You must not take this form of address amiss from me at least this once, for if, as you have already several times asked, I am to write about my way of life, then I must probably say some things delicate for me, which before a “gracious young lady” I could scarcely bring out. Besides, the new form of address cannot be anything quite so dreadful, otherwise I should not have thought it up with such great and still continuing satisfaction. My life consists and has consisted fundamentally from time immemorial of attempts to write and mostly of failed ones. But when I did not write, then I was already lying on the floor, fit to be swept out. Now my powers have always been miserably small and, even if I did not openly recognize it, it nevertheless followed of itself that I had to economize on all sides, let a little of myself go everywhere, in order to retain for that which seemed to me my chief purpose a power sufficient in case of need. Where, however, I did not do it myself (my God! even on this holiday, with journal duty in the office, no peace, but visitor after visitor like a little hell let loose), but wanted somewhere to go beyond myself; I was of myself pushed back, harmed, shamed, weakened forever, but precisely this, which made me unhappy for moments, has in the course of time given me confidence and I began to believe that there somewhere, even if hard to find, there must be a good star under which one could go on living. I once made for myself in detail a list of what I have sacrificed to writing and of what, for the sake of writing, was taken from me or, better, whose loss could be borne only with this explanation. And in fact, as thin as I am, and I am the thinnest person I know (which is saying something, since I have already been around a good deal in sanatoria), just so there is otherwise nothing about me that, with regard to writing, one could call superfluous and superfluous in the good sense. If therefore there is a higher power that wants to use me or uses me, then I lie in its hand as an at least clearly elaborated instrument; if not, then I am nothing at all and shall suddenly be left over in a terrible emptiness. Now I have enlarged my life by thinking of you, and there is hardly a quarter of an hour during my waking in which I have not thought of you, and many quarter-hours in which I do nothing else. But even this stands in connection with my writing, only the wave-motion of writing determines me, and certainly in a time of slack writing I should never have had the courage to turn to you. That is as true as it is true that since that evening I had a feeling as if I had an opening in my breast, through which, sucking and uncontrolled, it moved in and out, until one evening in bed, through the memory of a

the biblical story proved the necessity of that feeling as well as the truth of that biblical story at the same time. But how you are also twinned with my writing, although until then I believed that precisely while writing I was not thinking of you in the least, I have recently seen with astonishment. In a small paragraph which I had written there were found, among other things, the following relations to you and to your letters: Someone received a bar of chocolate as a gift. There was talk of small diversions which someone had during his service. Further on there was a telephone call. And finally someone urged another to go to sleep and threatened him, if he would not obey, to lead him all the way to his room. Which surely was only a recollection of the annoyance your mother had when you stayed so long in the office. – Such passages are especially dear to me, I hold you in them, without your feeling it and without your therefore having to defend yourself. And even if you should one day read something of the kind, these little things will certainly escape you. But you may believe this, that perhaps nowhere in the world could you let yourself be caught with greater unconcern than here. My way of life is arranged only with a view to writing and if it undergoes changes, then only because possibly it may correspond better to writing for time is short, strength is small, the office is a horror, the apartment is noisy and one must try to wriggle through by means of tricks, if it cannot be done with a beautiful straight life. The satisfaction over such a trick, which has succeeded for one in the apportionment of time, is, to be sure, nothing compared with the eternal lament that every weariness records itself in what is written much better and more clearly than what one Actually wanted to write down. For 1 1/2 months my apportionment of time, with some disturbances which in the last days have entered in consequence of unbearable weakness, has been the following: From 8 to 2 or 2 1/3 office, until 3 or 1/2 4 midday meal, from then on sleeping in bed (mostly only attempts, for a week long in this sleep I saw only Montenegrins with an extremely repulsive, headache-producing clarity of every detail of their complicated clothing) until 1/2 8, then 10 minutes gymnastics, naked at the open window, then an hour’s walk alone or with Max or with still another friend, then supper within the family (I have 3 sisters, one married, one engaged, the unmarried one is, without prejudice to my love for the others, by far the dearest to me) then at 1/2 11 (but often it even becomes 1/2 12) sitting down to write and remaining at it according to strength, desire and luck until 1, 2, 3 o’clock, once already even until 6 o’clock in the morning. Then again gymnastics, as above, only naturally avoiding every exertion, washing, and mostly with slight heart pains and twitching abdominal muscles into bed. Then all possible attempts to fall asleep, i.e. to achieve the impossible, for one cannot sleep (the gentleman even demands dreamless sleep) and at the same time think of one’s work and moreover want to solve with certainty the question which with certainty cannot be decided, whether a letter from you will come the next day and at what time. Thus the night consists of two parts, of a waking one and a sleepless one, and if I wanted to write to you about it in detail and if you wanted to listen to it, I would never be finished. Naturally it is then no particular wonder if in the office in the morning I begin to work just barely still with the end of my strength. Some time ago, in a corridor across which I always go to my typist, there stood a stretcher, on which files and printed forms are transported, and whenever I passed by it, it seemed to me above all suited for me and to be waiting for me. To be exact, I must not forget that I am not only an official but also a manufacturer. My brother-in-law has, namely, an asbestos factory, I (to be sure only with a capital contribution from my father) am a partner and as such also entered in the register. This factory has already caused me enough suffering and worries, of which however I do not want to tell now, in any case I have been neglecting it for a long time (that is, I withdraw from it my otherwise unusable collaboration) as well as possible and it goes fairly well.

But now again I have told so little and not asked at all and must already close again. But no answer and, still more undoubtedly, no question is to be lost. Well, there is indeed a magic means, by means of which two people, without seeing one another, without speaking with one another, can learn at least most of the past about one another, virtually at one stroke, without having to write everything to one another, but it is after all already almost a means of high magic (without looking so) and one does, after all, approach this, even if never unrewarded, still more certainly never unpunished. Therefore I do not pronounce it either, unless you should have to guess it. It is terribly short, like all magic spells. Farewell and let me seal this wish still with a long kiss of the hand. Your Franz K.

(Letterhead of the Workers’ Accident Insurance Institute) 2.X.12 (2 November 1912)

Gracious Fräulein!

How then? Do you too get tired? It is to me an almost uncanny feeling, to know you in the evening tired and alone in your office. How are you dressed then in the office? And wherein does your chief work consist? Do you write or dictate? And it must surely be a high position, if you have to speak with so many people, for the lower official surely sits mute at his table. That there is a factory by your office I had already guessed, but what is made there? Only Parlographs? But does anyone buy that? I am happy (unless in exceptional cases I myself write on the machine), to be able to dictate to a living human being (that is my chief work), who here and there, when nothing occurs to me just then, nods off a little, or who here and there stretches himself a little, or lights his pipe and meanwhile lets me look calmly out of the window? Or who, as today for example, when I abused him because of his slow writing, reminds me, in order to soothe me, that I have received a letter. Is there a Parlograph that can do that? I remember that some time ago a Dictaphone was demonstrated to us (at that time I did not yet have the prejudice which I have today against the products of your competition), but that was immoderately boring and impractical. I therefore cannot really think my way into the business, and would only wish that in reality too it were as groundless and airily organized as I imagine it, and that in it you led a correspondingly light and effortless life. Besides, I cannot find your Prague branch either, which, according to my recollection of one of your remarks, is supposed to be situated in the Obstgasse or Ferdinandstraße. I have looked for it quite often already, for surely I would have to be able to get some sign or some intimation of you from the sight of the firm’s signboard. To describe my office work gives me little pleasure. It is in itself not worth your learning about it, and it is also not worth my writing to you about it, for it leaves me no time and quiet to write to you, makes me as flighty and senseless as I am now, and is only again, by way of revenge, so disturbed by thoughts of you that it is a delight. Farewell! Tomorrow there will probably come a quiet Sunday, then I shall write you a great deal. And do not work yourself tired! Do not make me sad! — And this I write on the day on which you have received my letter of misery. What weak human beings we are!

Your Franz K.

feelings, which however in places has quite flown apart for me in the effort to get to this letter, to which, if I calculate exactly, I have been drawn since two o’clock at night, the moment when I stopped with my other writing. But now it is already so late, my tyrannical division of time actually already presupposes that I sleep for an hour, besides this is now the last relative stillness in the apartment that I can have before the actual night’s rest, finally there are proofs lying there, which for some days already, without having looked through them, I have had on the table and which are to be sent off tomorrow and may perhaps simply take away from me the few hours of evening and night time; for all these, for the most part stupid, reasons it will not become a systematic letter, as I wanted it and as is also fitting for Sunday. For all these reasons however, the last included, I am dissatisfied and sad and the tiny, quite young cat, which I hear from the kitchen, whimpers out of my heart. Now besides, as indeed I could not expect otherwise, I have received no letter from you, since your letters always come only with the second post, which on Sundays is no longer delivered, I shall therefore in the best case receive it only tomorrow morning after the long night. — Can anyone, under such circumstances, forbid me, as a small compensation for all this, to address you as I have done above? And does this address not fit together in detail and as a whole in such a way that, once it is there, one can never again break oneself of it? Dear Miss Felice, how did you spend this beautiful, so terribly short Sunday? If it were to disturb a person when another thinks of one, then you must have been startled awake in the middle of the night, early while reading in bed you must have lost the lines, at breakfast you must several times have looked away over cocoa and rolls and even over your mother, the orchids which you carried into a new apartment must once have stiffened in your hand and only perhaps now at Schilling’s Flight would you have peace, for now I am not thinking of you, but am with you. But I am with you, rather I have just at the full stop heard my father, who has just come home, telling an extremely bad piece of business news in the next room, have gone in and with father and mother stood together a few moments sad and distracted. In the last days two additions to our evening together have occurred to me, the one I found by chance in your letters, the other occurred to me of itself. You actually told me even then, and I do not understand how I could forget it, that it was an unpleasant feeling for you to live alone in a hotel. I probably said to this at the time that I, on the contrary, feel especially comfortable in a hotel room. Now for me that is really so, I experienced it particularly last year, when in the depth of winter I had to travel for a longer time in North Bohemian cities and little towns. To have for oneself this space of a hotel room with its four comprehensible walls, capable of being locked, to know one’s property, consisting of certain pieces, put away in certain places in the cupboards, tables, and clothes racks, always gives me again at least the breath of a feeling of a new, unused existence, determined for something better, exerting itself as much as possible, which indeed perhaps is nothing other than a despair driven beyond itself, which finds itself in the right place in this cold grave of a hotel room. In any case I always felt very well there and of almost every hotel room in which I have lived I can tell only the best. In general we probably both do not travel very much. But how is it now with your uneasiness, which does not even let you go up the stairs of your house alone at night? Besides, you must live quite low down, how else could one hear the clapping of hands from the street (I do not understand at all how one can hear it through the closed windows). And you do not want to go alone up these low stairs? You, who seem so calm and confident.

No, what you wrote me about the opening of the house door cannot suffice for me. That evening there was also talk of the Jargon theater. You had, to be sure, once seen such a performance, but could no longer remember the title of the piece. Now, I believe, just now in Berlin such a troupe is playing, and with it my good friend, a certain I. Löwy. It was he, incidentally, who in the long waiting-time between your first and second letter, unintentionally but still worthy of all thanks, sent me a little piece of news from you. For he writes to me very often and otherwise too sends me pictures, posters, newspaper cuttings and the like. So once he sent me also a poster of the Leipzig guest performance of the troupe. I left it lying folded together on the writing desk, almost without having looked at it. But as things are now apt to happen on a writing desk, that once what is undermost comes uppermost, without one’s wanting it, this very poster too once lay on top (and not, say, another one) and was moreover completely unfolded. To this chance there came the other one, that I read it more closely, for there are quite amusing things in it, (an actress, a married, older lady, whom incidentally I admire very much, is there called “Primadonna,” Löwy even calls himself “Dramatist”) but down in the corner stood, undoubtedly to one’s fright, Immanuelkirchstrasse in Berlin NO, in which the poster had been printed. And therefore I think out of gratitude today, when fortunately I no longer have to content myself with such news about you, of whether you might not once wish to see these actors, of whom incidentally I could tell you endlessly. I do not know quite definitely whether they are playing in Berlin now, but according to a card from this Löwy, it is lying somewhere about on my table, I believe I may assume it. Certainly this man would please you very much for at least a quarter of an hour. Perhaps you could, if it gives you pleasure, before the play or after

Now it is Monday 10:30 in the morning. Since Saturday 10:30 I have been waiting for a letter and again nothing has come. I have written every day (that is not the slightest reproach, for it has made me happy) but do I really deserve not a word? Not a single word? And even if it were only the answer I do not want to hear anything more from you. And yet I believed that your letter today would contain a small decision and now the non-arrival of the letter is, to be sure, also a decision. Had a letter come, I would have answered at once and the answer would have had to begin with a complaint about the length of the two endless days. And now you let me sit comfortless at my comfortless writing desk!

5.XI.12 Dear Miss Felice! If you want me always to write to you as it really is, then you will also easily forgive me my accursed, superfluous fright-letter of yesterday, for just as it stood on the scrap of paper, so It actually was, word for word. Today, of course, your two last letters came, one early, the other at ten, I have not the least right to complain, even receive the promise of getting a letter every day (heart, listen, every day a letter!) and can be glad if you forgive me. Only I should like to implore you, if a letter is already finished for me, do not let me suffer because you have no stamp at hand, just drop it in without fear and vigorously without a stamp. The misery is that, if it is not Sunday, I can write to you almost only in my dullest hour of the day, from 3-4 o’clock. In the office it is possible only seldom — how I have to restrain myself when I have read a letter from you! — but if I did not write to you now, then I could not fall asleep at all for dissatisfaction, and besides you would no longer get the letter the next day, and in the evening, upon my division of hours, time presses too much. Besides, I see from your letter that I write unreasonably even on holidays. My heart is probably, relatively, quite healthy, but it is just not easy for a human heart at all to withstand the gloom of bad writing and the happiness of good writing. In the sanatoria I was only because of the stomach and the general weakness and, not to be forgotten, the hypochondria in love with itself. But about all that I must write at greater length sometime. No, I do not believe in famous doctors; doctors I believe only when they say that they know nothing, and besides I hate them (hopefully you love none). To be sure, I would already let Berlin be prescribed to me for a free, quiet life, but where is this mighty doctor to be found? And precisely Immanuel-Kirchstraße must be good for tired people. I can describe it to you. Listen: “From Alexander Platz draws itself a long, not lively street, Prenzloer Street, Prenzloer Allee. Which has many side-little-streets. One of these little-streets is the Immanuel Kirchstrass. Quiet, remote, far from the always rosching Berlin. The little-street begins with an ordinary church. Vi sa vi stands the house No. 37 quite narrow and high. The little-street is also quite narrow. When I am there, is always calm, still and I ask, is that still Berlin?” Thus, in a letter that I received yesterday, the actor Löwy describes your street to me. The last question is poetic, I find, and the whole a faithful description. Some time ago I asked him for it, without giving a reason, and he writes me this just as much without asking further. To be sure I wanted to hear about the house No. 30 (but now you live actually at 29, if I am not mistaken), I do not know why he picked out house 37 for me. Now, besides, it occurs to me that perhaps the printing-shop of that poster is in this house. According to this last letter the troupe seems to have given its last Berlin performance on Sunday, but it is, insofar as I can read this out of the letter, possible that it will play again next Sunday. I write this again only to correct my last statements and with all the reservations which I made there for the advice to visit this theatre.

The magic word happens also to stand in your next-to-last letter and does not know it. There it is lost among many others and will, I fear, in our letters never come to the rank it deserves, for I shall in no case pronounce it first and you, naturally, even if you should guess it, will not pronounce it first. Perhaps it is good so, for, assuming the entry of the effect of that word, you would find things in me which you would not want to tolerate and what should I then begin to do? My writing and my relation to writing you would then above all look at differently and would no longer want to advise me to have “measure and limit.” “Measure and limit” presupposes human weakness enough already. Must I not, on the only spot where I can stand, stake everything I have? If I did not do that, what an incurable fool I would be! It is possible that my writing is nothing, but then it is also quite certain and beyond doubt that I am altogether nothing. If therefore I spare myself in this, then, rightly seen, I do not really spare myself, but kill myself. How old, by the way, do you take me to be? Perhaps on our evening there was talk of it, I do not know, perhaps however you did not pay attention to it. Farewell and continue to mean well by me and just calmly leave the letters to Frau Sophie, once begun, aside. I am very fond of Frau F. (Friedmann), but not so fond that I would grant her your letters. No, we are in no correspondence. I have written her only 3 letters: the first was complaint on your account, the second unrest on your account, the third thanks on your account. Adieu! Your Franz K.

(Letterhead of the Workers’ Accident Insurance Institute) 6.X.12 (6 November 1912) Dear Miss Felice! But they are tearing you to pieces before my eyes! Do you not give yourself up to too many people, to unnecessarily many? In which there would certainly be nothing bad, if only you had more time for it. Do you not do many pieces of work, visits, do you not go to certain entertainments, at which nothing is gained but unrest? I am being a little didactic here, without knowing and understanding much of the matter, but your last letter is so nervous that one gets the desire to hold your hand fast for a moment. By this I say nothing against particulars, nothing against the good temptations at the Professor’s, even if I did open my eyes wide over the “Water and Gas,” nothing either against the foundation festival, especially since at such festivals group photographs are often made, which one can easily give away, without actually expressly giving one’s photograph along with them. And with them one can give great pleasure to people away from home, if one wants to. About the Jargon theatre I certainly did not speak ironically perhaps laughed, but that belongs to love. I even, before a countless number of people, as it now seems to me, gave a little introductory lecture and Löwy then acted, sang and recited. Unfortunately the money that was beaten out of that countless number was not correspondingly countless. About the Berlin performances I know no more than I wrote yesterday, for otherwise Löwy’s last letter contains only complaint and lamentation. Incidentally complaint also about the fact that in Berlin on weekdays nothing can be earned, a reproach which I must not conceal from the Berliner woman. For the rest L. is, if one lets him have his way, a positively uninterruptedly enthusiastic person, a “hot Jew,” as they say in the East. Now, however, he is for various reasons, the telling of which would be too long, even if it would not be boring, unhappy beyond all measure and the bad thing is that I do not know at all how he could be helped. My Sunday expectation of your letter is easy to explain I was simply going to the office to look, but at that time I was not yet actually disappointed and leafed through the mail that was there not expectantly but merely in thought. My residential address is Niklasstraße 36.

But what, please, is yours? I have already read three different addresses on the back of your letters, is it then No. 29? Is it not troublesome for you to receive registered letters? I send them not merely out of nervousness, though incidentally for this reason too, but I have the feeling that such a letter comes more straight into your hand, not in the negligent pendulum-motion of such sadly wandering ordinary letters, and in doing so I always see the outstretched hand of a sturdy Berlin letter-carrier, who would force the letter upon you if necessary, even if you defended yourself. One cannot have enough helpers, when one is dependent. — Farewell! I am proud that in this letter there is no complaint, however beautiful it is to complain to you. Your Franz K.

(Letterhead of the Workers’ Accident Insurance Institute) 7.XI.12 Dearest Miss Felice! Yesterday I made out that I was anxious about you and took pains to speak to you persuasively. But what am I myself doing meanwhile? Am I not tormenting you? Not intentionally, to be sure, for that would be impossible and, if it were so, would have to vanish before your last letter as the devilish before the good, but through my existence, through my existence I torment you. I am at bottom unchanged, go on turning in my circle, have only acquired a new, unfulfilled desire in addition to my other unfulfilled one, and have been given a new human certainty, perhaps my strongest, in addition to my otherwise being lost. You, however, feel uneasy and disturbed, weep in dreams, which is worse than looking sleeplessly at the ceiling, are different from that evening when your gaze went so calmly from one person to another, flit through everything, now in your letter there are 20 people, now none, in short the gains are unjustly, most unjustly distributed between us. (What are you doing, man, sitting down now in this quiet room, which to be sure belongs to you, opposite me!) I repeat, it is not I who have incurred this guilt,—what indeed am I?—but that toward which my mind has from the beginning alone been directed, and whose direction even now is its only one and into which it must drive you if it does not want to lose you. What a sad force this is which I am condemned to inflict upon you! After a long interruption (If only I had time, if only I had time! I would gain calm and the right view over everything. I would understand how to write to you more cautiously. I would never hurt you, as I do now, although there is nothing I want more painfully to avoid. I would gain calm and would not, as only a few moments ago upstairs in my office, tremble over the files in thoughts of you and now sit here dully in the incidental stillness of this room and look out of the window

finally still no reason for going about as I do, thus for example up to now, into November, not to have worn an overcoat, neither a light one nor a heavy one, in the street among bundled-up passers-by to cut the figure of a fool in a summer suit with a little summer hat, as a matter of principle to go without a waistcoat (I am the inventor of waistcoatless clothing), while I am still silent about peculiarities of my linen not further to be described. How you would be frightened if, near the church which I imagine at the beginning of your street, such a person were to come toward you! For my way of life there are (apart from the fact that, since I have been leading it, I am incomparably healthier than formerly) some explanations, but none would you accept, especially since everything that may be healthy in it (of course I also do not smoke, do not drink alcohol, not coffee, not tea, in general, whereby I make good a mendacious concealment, I do not eat chocolate either) I have long since destroyed again by insufficient sleep. Dearest Miss Felice, do not reject me on this account, however, do not seek to improve me in these things either, and tolerate me kindly at the great distance. For you see, yesterday evening for example I came home out of the ice-cold weather in my usual attire, sat down to my almost day-for-day uniform supper, heard my brother-in-law and the one who will soon be so tell various things, then remained, while people were saying goodbye in the anteroom (I now have supper between half past nine and ten), alone in the room and got such a longing for you that I would most gladly have laid my face on the table, in order somehow to be held. You consider me much younger than I am, and I almost want to conceal my age, for the high number gives just to everything with which I trouble you still more emphasis. I am even still almost a year older than Max and on July 3 shall be 30 years old. To be sure I look like a boy and according to the human knowledge of the uninitiated judge my age is estimated at 18-25 years. Yesterday I perhaps said something about the professor that could be taken as arrogance, hush, it is nothing but jealousy. Only today have I, at least in my sense, something against him, since he recommended Binding to you, of whom indeed I know only very little, but not a line that would not be false, exaggerated song. And this he sends over your dreams! — And now still quickly. Why do you jump from the electric tram? My frightened face shall be before you if you want to do it next time! And the oculist? And the headaches? I shall not read your next letter if it does not first contain answers to these. Your Franz K.

8.XI.12 Dear Miss Felice! Your last letter but two (not your “last letters,” as you write) has confused me, that is certain, but I did not know that it had been so bad as I must now believe from your last letter. Am I really so uncertain? And do my most hidden impatience and my incurable dissatisfaction tremble in visible letters? And must I let my letters tell me what I mean? How sad it is around me and into this I want to draw you with all my strength! I do not know whether you picture my life to yourself correctly and from it understand my sensitivity, which is nervous and always ready, but once lured out leaves me behind like a stone. I have probably read your letter already 20 times, when I received it several times; before the typewriter several times; a party was sitting at my table, I read your letter as if it had just come; I have read it in the street and now at home. But I know no help for myself and feel powerless. If we were together, I would be silent, since we are far apart, I must write, otherwise I would perish of sadness. Who knows whether I do not need the pressure of that hand more than you, not that hand which calms, but that which gives strength. With my tiredness yesterday it had become so bad, already death-like bad, that after all sorts of

resolutions, finally after all, I denied myself the writing last night. In the evening I walked about the streets for two hours and came back only when the hands in my pockets were quite stiff with cold. Then I slept for 6 hours almost without interruption and have only an indistinct memory of a dream, which dealt with you and in any case represented some unhappy occurrence. It is the first time that I dreamed of you and remembered it. Now it occurs to me that it was precisely this dream which woke me the only time in this night, even if only fleetingly. Early in the morning I was, moreover, awakened before the usual time, for our Fräulein stormed into the apartment and brought, in the form of a scream, of a, as it seemed to me in half-sleep, downright maternal scream, the news that my sister shortly after midnight had given birth to a girl. I remained a while longer in bed – explicitly they do not wake me even in need, but certainly by noise behind all doors – and could not comprehend our Fräulein’s friendly participation in this birth, since I, after all, the brother and uncle, felt not the least friendliness, but only envy, nothing but furious envy against my sister or rather against my brother-in-law, for I shall never have a child, that is still more certain than - (I do not want uselessly to pronounce a greater misfortune). As cheerful, then, as I am today, so I am after a night slept out and after an evening missed out of stupid caution. Dearest Fräulein! Your Franz K.

(On the back of a setting proof of “Children on the Country Road”) 8.XI.12 Dear Miss Felice! I cannot fetch the letter paper now at 1/2 1 in the night, it is next door in the room, but there my sister is sleeping, there is a little confusion in the apartment, for our grandson and nephew is quartered with us on account of the birth of his sister. Therefore I am writing on this blotting paper, with which at the same time I am sending you a setting proof of my little book. Now listen, dearest Miss, it seems to me as if my words in the stillness of the night acquired more clarity. Shall we not forget my afternoon letter of today as a letter and keep it as an admonition. Of course only in good and best understanding. Today’s afternoon after the letter will remain unforgettable to me in its terribleness and the time during which I wrote the letter was bad enough already. So that is how I am, then, when for once I have written nothing for myself (though of course that alone did not have an effect). If I live only for myself and for indifferent or accustomed or present people, who through their indifference or the accustoming or their living, present force make up for my deficiency, then it passes by after all more unnoticed even for me. But where I want to bring myself close to someone and to stake myself entirely, then the misery becomes irrefutable. Then I am nothing and what am I to do with nothing. I even confess that your letter in the morning (in the afternoon it was already different) came quite rightly for me, just such words I needed. But I am still not recovered, I notice, I do not write clearly enough, against this letter too your reproach of today would be right. We will leave it to sleep and to good gods. How do you like the type specimen (the paper will of course be different?) It is without doubt a little exaggeratedly beautiful and would be better suited to the tablets of the law of Moses than to my little stratagems. But now it will already be printed so. Farewell! I need more friendliness than I deserve. Your Franz K.

Dearest Fräulein! You must not write to me any more, I too shall not write to you any more. I would have to make you unhappy through my writing, and for me there is, after all, no help. In order to see that, I would not have needed to count all the clock-strokes of this night, I knew it clearly before my first letter, and if nevertheless I tried to cling to you, then I did indeed deserve to be cursed for it, if I were not so already. If you want your letters, I shall of course send them back, however gladly I would keep them. If you nevertheless want them, write me an empty postcard, as the sign of that. On the other hand I beg you, as much as I can, to keep my letters. - Forget quickly the ghost that I am, and live cheerfully and quietly as before.

11.XI.12 Dearest Fräulein! Thank God! I say so too. If you knew how I spent Friday and Saturday and quite especially this night from Friday to Saturday. There was truly not a stroke of the clock in any quarter-hour that I failed to count. In the afternoon I had written my next-to-last letter under the utmost and most necessary self-torment, had then made a walk and lain down comparatively late. It may be—I no longer know exactly—that I then fell asleep from sheer sadness. In the evening I wrote three or four pages for myself, which were not the worst, I asked myself in vain where in me there were still such quiet places out of which that flowed, while I was excluded from quiet. Later I already believed I was a whole human being and wrote that letter on blotting paper, which again under my hand twisted itself into evil and which I stared at as if I had not written it but received it. Then I lay down and fell asleep strikingly quickly, even if only quite superficially. But—after a quarter of an hour I was already awake again, in half-dream it had seemed to me as if there were knocking (breaks off) (now I want to settle an urgent, abominable, ancient, for a week already threatening matter, without permitting myself a thought of you, you must stand by me in this, perhaps then as reward I shall get a free moment and quiet for this letter, which goes to my heart quite exactly as much as my heartbeat and which fills my head altogether, as if I were not sitting in an institution to which I have sold my half-days and more still and which without interruption makes its apparently justified claims on me, a piece of luck still that before my sleepy eyes less important work slips away, but now write no more and work.) The reward has failed to appear, my work chases me here and there and the thought of you likewise, only in other directions. Today I received your last 3 letters almost all at once. Your goodness is infinite. For the time being I am sending this letter off as it is, I shall probably write several more times today. I shall explain to you exactly why I did not write yesterday. I am posting this letter just as it is, because I suffer from the fact that no letter of mine at least is moving toward you. So a farewell only for a few hours Your Franz K.

11.XI.12 Dearest Miss! So I have not lost you. And I was already, truly, convinced of it. That letter, in which you declared one of my letters to be alien, had horrified me. I saw in it the unintentional and only all the more decisive confirmation of a curse, to which I precisely in the

Inarticulate. At the moment I was actually furious about not having been run over. The driver naturally misunderstood that and scolded me with justice. No, I do not live entirely withdrawn from my family. This is proved by the enclosed account of the acoustic conditions of our apartment, which, for the little-painful public chastisement of my family, has just appeared in a small Prague journal. Apart from that, my youngest sister (already over 20 years old) is my best Prague friend and the other two too are sympathetic and good. Only father and I, we hate one another bravely. Quickly still, before it is closing time, tell me a means by which I shall not tremble like a fool for joy when I get and read your letters in the office, so that I can work there and not be thrown out. I could surely read them calmly, could I not? and forget for a couple of hours. That would have to be attainable. Your Franz.

11.XI.12 Miss Felice! Now I shall put before you a request which truly looks insane, and I would judge it no differently if I were given the letter to read. But it is also the strongest test to which one can put the kindest human being. So I ask: Write to me only once a week and in such a way that I receive your letter Sunday. For I cannot endure your daily letters, I am not in a position to endure them. I answer, for example, your letter and then lie apparently still in bed, but a pounding of the heart goes through my body and knows of nothing but you. How I belong to you, there is really no other possibility of expressing it and that one is too weak. But precisely for that reason I do not want to know how you are dressed, for it throws me into confusion so that I cannot live, and for that reason I do not want to know that you are well disposed toward me, for why then am I, fool, still sitting in my office or here at home, instead of throwing myself with closed eyes into the train and opening them only when I am with you. Oh there is a bad, bad reason why I do not do that and short and good: I am still just barely healthy for myself, but no longer for marriage and certainly not for fatherhood. But when I read your letter, I could overlook still more than the unoverlookable. If only I already had your answer! And how hideously I torment you and how I force you, in your quiet room, to read this letter, than which no more abominable one has ever lain on your writing-desk! Truly sometimes it seems to me as though I were feeding like a ghost on your happiness-bringing name! If only I had sent off my Saturday letter, in which I implored you never again to write to me and gave you the same promise for myself. Dear God, what kept me from sending the letter away. Everything would be well. But is there still now a peaceful solution? Does it help, that we write to each other only once a week? No, that would be a small suffering, one to be remedied by such means. I foresee it plainly, I shall not endure these Sunday letters either. And therefore, in order to make good what was missed on Saturday, I ask you with the writing strength already somewhat failing at the end of this letter: let us leave everything, if our life is dear to us. Did I want to sign myself Yours? Nothing would be more false. No, mine and eternally bound to myself, that is what I am and with that I must try to make do. Franz

(On Sunday, the 17th of November, delivered by messenger with a bouquet of roses.)

(13 November 1912) Wretched attempt, to send innocent roses after criminal words! But it is just so: For what has room in a single human being, the outside world is too small, too unequivocal, too

truly. – Good, but then this person should at least, toward the one on whom he believes he depends, keep himself in possession of his senses. – So precisely there, where it is wholly and utterly impossible?

14.XI.12 Dearest, dearest! If there is so much goodness in the world, then one need not be afraid, need not be uneasy. Your letter came—I was sitting with my chief and we were discussing the insurance of the feldspar mines—then I seized the letter again with the old trembling of the hands and looked at the chief as at an apparition. But hardly had I read it two or three times, when I was as calm as I had long wished to be and as I prayed to be three nights ago. Your envelope—(that is wrong, of course, it should be called the envelope, but the Du and Dein will continually let themselves be seen)—the envelope with the reassuring lines cannot have brought it about, for I read those only later, and what stood in the letter should after all have shaken me, for the more one receives, the more one must be afraid on this rolling earth, it can therefore only have been the Du that held me fast, this Du for which I thank you on my knees, for the unrest about you forced it from me and now you give it calmly back to me: you dearest! Can I now be sure of you? The Sie, that glides as if on skates, in the gap between two letters it can have vanished, one must chase after it with letters and thoughts in the morning, in the evening, in the night, but the Du, that stands after all, that remains like your letter there, which does not stir and lets itself be kissed by me and kissed again. What a word that is! Nothing joins two people to one another so without gaps, especially when they have nothing but words, as we two have. Today I was the calmest person in the office, as calm as only the strictest man, after a week like the last, can demand of himself. I will tell you about it yet. Yes, just think, I even look well, there are always a few people in the office who make a trade of inspecting my appearance daily. These, then, said so. I had no haste to answer you (which besides was quite impossible today) but there was no twitch in me that did not answer and thank you unceasingly. Dearest, dearest! I wanted to string the word together for pages, if I did not fear that it could not remain hidden what you are reading, if now someone were to enter your room, if you were in the act of studying the pages so monotonously written over. Yesterday I wrote you only a few lines, you will receive them only Sunday. It would cost me trouble to fetch them back now, but it is also unnecessary; I mention it only so that you will not be unnecessarily astonished—to bring you to astonishment, in that I have indeed truly not been lacking up to now—they are a few lines without date, heading, and signature, and in lamentable uncertainty they wanted to attempt a reconquest. Look on them kindly! But tell me, how do you know that what I have written you here and there in recent times has been torment and not madness. Yet it did look very much like the latter and in your place I would have hastened with all my strength to draw my hand back from it. The last letter, for example, it was not written, it was—forgive the expression—vomited; I lay in bed and it did not come to me in the sequence of sentences, but as one single sentence, held in frightful tension, which seemed to want to kill me if I did not write it down. When I then really wrote, it was no longer so bad, I was already gathering more together, following memories, and in streaks small consoling untruths already went through the letter. But with what lightness I carried it to the railway, with what haste I threw it in, how I went home as an unhappy, but after all still living human being, until the terrible two hours before falling asleep brought me again to another state of mind. No more of that. I shall receive your letters again, write when you want or better when you want or better when you can, do not keep yourself in the office on my account until evening, I shall not suffer if no letter comes, for if then one comes again,

it will under my hand become alive for me as still—so it seems to me—has never happened to any letter, and for my eyes and lips it will richly replace all the letters not written. You, however, will have more time and go walking on these beautiful evenings that there are now (yesterday I was walking with my youngest sister from 10 to half past 11 at night, at 10 we went away and at half past 11 came back, perhaps you do not imagine her rightly, she is already 20 years old and positively gigantic in height and strong, but childish enough) if you do not just have to hurry to rehearsals. That the “Humor” may succeed well for you! I am indeed tormenting Max and have already in all possible streets almost wrenched his arm out of joint on account of you, but the fool knows, from the whole telephone conversation, almost nothing to tell except of your laughter. How well you must understand telephoning, if before the telephone you can laugh like that. My laughter leaves me already when I merely think of the telephone. What else would prevent me from running to the post office and wishing you a good evening? But there to wait an hour for the connection, to hold fast to the bench from unrest, finally to be called and to run to the telephone so that everything trembles, then with a weak voice to ask for you, finally to hear you and perhaps not be able to answer, to thank God that the 3 minutes are over and to go home with a longing, now however already unbearable, really to speak with you—no, I would rather leave that alone. Besides, the possibility remains after all as a beautiful hope, what is your telephone number, I fear Max has forgotten it. So and now I shall sleep in exemplary fashion. Dearest, my dearest, I am quite unmusical, but if music does not belong to this! Your Franz

14.XI.12 Dearest, do not let yourself be disturbed, I am only saying good night to you and have therefore interrupted my writing in the middle of a page. I am afraid that soon I shall no longer be able to write to you, for in order to be able to write to someone (I must name you with all names, therefore for once you are also called “someone”), one must after all imagine that one has his face before one, to which one turns. And your face is very well imaginable to me, on that it would not founder. But the still much stronger imagining begins ever more often to hold me, that my face is lying on your shoulder and that I speak more suffocated than intelligibly to your shoulder, to your dress, to myself, while you can have no idea what is being spoken there. Are you sleeping now? Or are you still reading, which I would condemn? Or are you even still at a rehearsal, which I certainly do not want to hope. According to my always dawdling, but never spoiled clock, it is one o’clock in 7 minutes. Remember, you must sleep more than other people, for I sleep a little, not much less than the average. And I know no better place to keep my unused share of the general sleep than your dear eyes. And please no wild dreams! In thought I make a circuit around your bed and command silence. And after I have made order here and perhaps have also pushed a drunkard out of Immanuelkirchstraße, I return, more orderly also in myself, to my writing or perhaps even already to sleep. Do always write me, dearest, what you have approximately been doing at the approximate time of my letters. I shall then check my intuitions by that, you will as far as possible bring the facts nearer to my intuitions, and would it then be so incredible that after many trials the two of them finally meet and become one single great reality, of which one is always sure. — Now then it strikes 1 from the tower exactly according to Prague time. Adieu, Felice, adieu! How can you come by that name? And do not fly away from me! somehow occurs to me, perhaps through the word “Adieu,” which has such power of flight. It would indeed have to be, I think to myself, a

an extraordinary pleasure, to fly away upward, if by doing so one can get rid of a heavy weight that hangs on one, as I on you. Do not let yourself be enticed by the relief that beckons. Remain in the delusion that you need me. Think yourself still more deeply into it. For see, it does you after all no harm; if ever you want to be rid of me, then you will always have enough strength to become so too, but to me in the meantime you have made a gift such as in this life I had not even dreamed of finding. So it is, even if in your sleep you shake your head. Franz

(letterhead of the Workers’ Accident Insurance Institute) 15.XI.12 You, the “you” is after all no such help as I thought. And today, that is already on the second day, it does not prove itself. I could after all have been calm and nothing was more explicable than that no letter comes today. But what do I do? There I flutter about in the corridors, look at every servant’s hands, give unnecessary orders, only so as to be able to send someone down to the post especially (for I am on the 4th floor, the incoming post is sorted below, our postmen are unpunctual, besides we have board elections, the incoming mail is enormous and before one finds Your letter out from among the stupid masses, I may upstairs have perished of impatience) finally out of mistrust toward all the world I run down myself and naturally find nothing, for if something had come, I would indeed have received it as soon as possible, for 3 people have been obliged by me to bring Your letter up to me before all other post. On account of this task of theirs the 3 deserve to be named here: The first is the servant Mergl, humble and willing, but I have an uncontrollable aversion to him, because I have made the observation that, if once my hope is placed chiefly on him, only in the rarest cases does Your letter come. The unintentionally cruel appearance of this man goes through my marrow and bone in such cases. So it was indeed also today, at least the empty hand I would have wanted to beat. And yet he seems to take part. I am not ashamed to confess that I have already several times on such empty days asked him for his opinion as to whether perhaps the letter will come the next day and he was always, with bows, convinced of it. Once I expected — it occurs to me now — with senseless certainty a letter from You, it must still have been in the bad first month, then the servant makes me the report in the corridor that the thing has arrived and is lying on my table. But when I come running to my table, there lies only a picture postcard from Max from Venice with a picture by Bellini, representing: “Love, the Ruler of the Globe.” But what is one to do with generalities in one’s particular, independently aching case! — The second messenger is the chief of the dispatch Wottawa, an old, little bachelor with a wrinkled face covered with patches of color in the most variously nuanced shades, bristling with beard-stubble, and always he smacks about with wet lips on a Virginia, but he is supernaturally beautiful when, standing between the door, he draws Your letter from his breast pocket and hands it to me, which yet — be it well understood — is not actually his task. He has an inkling of something of it, for he always tries, if only he has time, to forestall the two others, and does not regret having to climb the 4 flights of stairs. To be sure the thought is again painful to me that sometimes, in order to be able to hand me the letter himself, he holds it back from the servant, who here and there would bring it earlier. Yes, without unrest it simply does not come off. — The third hope is Miss Böhm. Yes, then, she is made positively happy by the handing over of the letter. Radiant she comes and gives me the letter, as if it were, to be sure, apparently a stranger’s letter, but in truth concerned only us two, her and me. If one of the two others has succeeded in bringing the letter, and I then tell her so, she almost wants to weep and she firmly resolves, the next day

to watch more carefully. But the house is very large, we have over 250 officials, and another one can easily snatch the letter away from her. Today all three were without work. I am curious how often I shall still repeat this, since it was, after all, quite out of the question that a letter should come today. It was only today, too, that I was uneasy, on this day of transition; if after tomorrow’s letter you do not write, I shall no longer concern myself with it at all. Formerly I said to myself: “She is not writing,” and that was bad; but now I shall say, “Dearest, so you have gone for a walk,” and at that I shall only be able to rejoice. At what time, actually, did you receive my night-letter? Your Franz

15.XI.12, 11 1/2 o’clock at night

Dearest, today I am writing to you before my writing, so that I may not have the feeling of making you wait, so that you are not opposite me, but at my side, and so that I may then write for myself more calmly, for, said in confidence, for a few days I have been writing terribly little, indeed almost nothing, I have too much to do with you, too much to think of you. Of the two books, which perhaps will not arrive in time at all, the one is for your eyes, the other, however, for your heart. The first is really chosen a little arbitrarily and by chance, beautiful as it is; there are many books that I would have to give you before this one; now, however, it is to show that between us even the arbitrary is already permitted, because it transforms itself into the necessary. The Éducation sentimentale, however, is a book that has stood near me through many years, as scarcely two or three human beings have; whenever and wherever I have opened it, it has startled me and taken me over completely, and I have then always felt myself a spiritual child of this writer, even if a poor and awkward one. Write me at once whether you read French. You will then also receive the new French edition. Write that you read French, even if it is not true, for this French edition is magnificent. For your birthday (so it coincides with your mother’s, so immediately, then, do you continue her life?) I, of all people, may wish you nothing at all, for even if there are very probably urgent wishes for you that would at the same time be directed against me — well, I cannot utter them; but what I could say would be only selfishness. So that now, as it must be, I may remain quite certainly silent and be able to utter no wish, allow me, yet only in foreboding, yet only this one time, to kiss your beloved mouth.

Franz

Max Brod to Felice Bauer 15.XI.1912 Dear gracious Miss Many thanks for your kind letter. I shall speak with Franz this afternoon, of course without mentioning your letter, and shall then write to you at once, unless this has not, as I hope, become superfluous through an elucidation of the situation having meanwhile occurred. — I only beg you to make many allowances for Franz and his often morbid sensitivity. He obeys wholly the mood of the moment. In general he is a man who wants only the unconditional, the extreme in everything. Never does he have anything to do with compromises. For example: if he does not feel in himself the whole strength for writing, then he is capable of composing not a line for months, instead of contenting himself with a half and also-good piece of writing. And as in literature, so it is with him in everything. Through this there often arises the appearance, as if he were capricious, overwrought, etc. But that is never the case, as I know from exact knowledge of his character, he is even, when —

when it comes to that, very clever and skilful in the choice of practical means. Only in ideal matters does he have no sense of joking, there he is terribly strict, above all with himself, and from this arise, since in himself he has a weak body and since his external circumstances of life (office!!) are not the most favorable, conflicts over which one must help him by understanding and kindness, in the consciousness that so unique, wonderful a human being simply deserves to be treated differently from millions of banal ordinary people. - I am convinced that you will not misunderstand my words. I ask you, in cases like today’s, to turn to me. Franz suffers greatly from having to be in the office every day until 2. In the afternoon he is exhausted and so there remains for him, for the “fullness of visions,” only the night. That is a misery! And at the same time he is writing a novel that puts everything literary that I know in the shade. What could he accomplish if he were free and lodged in good hands! I beg you most heartily not to tell anyone that I was in Berlin. I visited no one, spoke only with you. – I hope that you are very well and that everything turns out happily. Most cordially yours Max Brod

15.XI.12 (16 November 1912) Dearest, do not torment me so! do not torment me so! You leave me today too, Saturday, without a letter, precisely today, when I thought it must come as surely as day comes after night. But who then asked for a letter, only two lines, a greeting, an envelope, a card, in response to four letters, this is the fifth, I have still not seen a word from you. Come, that is not right. How am I then to spend the long days, work, talk and whatever else is demanded of me. Perhaps nothing has happened, you merely had no time, theater rehearsals or preliminary discussions kept you back, but just tell me what human being can keep you from stepping to a little side-table, writing “Felice” in pencil on a scrap of paper and sending that to me. And for me it would already be so much! A sign of your life, a reassurance in the risk of having attached oneself to something living. Tomorrow a letter will and must come, otherwise I know no counsel for myself; then everything will also be good and I shall then no longer plague you with requests for such frequent writing; but if tomorrow a letter comes, then — it is again unnecessary to greet you Monday morning in the office with these complaints; but I must do it, for I have, when you do not answer, the feeling, to be removed by no reason, that you are turning away from me, speaking with others and have forgotten me. And am I perhaps to tolerate that in silence? Nor am I waiting for a letter from you for the first time (even if always, as I am convinced, through no fault of yours) the enclosed old letter proves it. Yours (enclosed) (letterhead of the Workers’ Accident Insurance Institute) (date missing) Gracious Miss! Just now I had an errand to the Statthalterei, went there and back slowly, it is a pretty distance, one crosses the river to the other bank of the Moldau. I had reconciled myself to the fact that today no letter from you would come any more, for until now I thought, if it does not come first thing in the morning, it can no longer come. During the last two days I have been, for various reasons, a little sad and distracted and on the way back remained standing in Belvederegasse, on one side of the street there are residential buildings, on the other the unusually high wall of the Count Waldstein Garden — took, without thinking much, your letters from my pocket, laid

put the letter to Max, which was just the one I did not care about and which lay uppermost, underneath, and read a few lines of your first letter. Certainly they were for the most part sleep-movements, for I sleep very little and feel it, without really being tired. And now I come into the office and there lies the unexpected letter in the magnificent size of your letter-paper and with the most gratifying weight. Again it is no answer that I am writing, let us allow question and answer to entangle themselves as they please, above all the beautiful things in your letter the most beautiful is the permission to be allowed to write to you whenever I want. For in the end I thought it was perhaps time to stop with writing in its daily repetition, in this respect I do not know you, perhaps the daily appearance of the letter is painful to you, I however, in my unpunctuality spread out over my whole being, am set upon writing to you, precisely to you, without resistance. But now I have my permission, I can do what I want, and just as I may write again without an answer, I have the hope, if I should be incapable of writing, nevertheless by grace still to receive a letter, since I then have doubly need of it. Today an answer only to one thing. Away with the Pyramidon and all such things! Go at the reasons for the headaches, instead of into the pharmacy! A pity that I cannot survey a longer period of your life, in order to know where the beginning of the headaches is lodged. Is the feeling of the artificial, which such remedies still have even in their best effect, not more unbearable to you than the headaches, with which one is at least struck by nature. Besides, there is healing only from human being to human being, just as there is transference of suffering only from human being to human being, as in this case with your headaches and me. Farewell and remain kindly disposed toward me. Your Kafka

17.XI.12 Dearest, most beloved, I, utterly and entirely accursed, have then the glory of having made you, the healthy one, ill. Spare yourself, you hear, spare yourself, what I have been guilty of toward you, make it good again on yourself for love of me! And I dare to reproach you because of your not-writing and bury myself so in my own unrest and my own desire that I do not feel at all that you are ill, but have ridiculous suppositions, that you are in rehearsals or conversations. Truly, if we were separated by continents and you lived somewhere in Asia, we could not be farther apart. Each of your letters is, after all, infinite for me, however small it may be (God, how everything turns in me into apparent reproaches, your letter today is not small, it is exactly 10,000 times larger than I deserve it) I read it down to the signature and begin it again and so it goes on in the most beautiful circle. But finally I must nevertheless see that it has a full stop, that you have risen from it and gone away, for me into the dark. Then one would like to strike oneself on the forehead. Today, however, it really was already the highest time that the letter came. I am not so resolute as you, I did not want to travel to Berlin, I was merely resolved; not to get out of bed before the letter came and to this resolution no particular strength belonged, I simply could not get up for sadness. It seemed to me also that this novel had yesterday in the night very much deteriorated and I lay at the very bottom and yet still had the clearest recollection of the happiness after that registered letter and when I looked, I saw myself, who was nevertheless so wretched, positively still going in the height, in happiness. The night before last I dreamed of you for the second time. A postman brought me two registered letters from you and indeed he handed them to me, one in each hand, with a splendidly precise movement of the arms, which twitched like the piston rods of a steam engine. God, they were magic letters. I could draw so many written sheets out of the envelopes, they did not become empty. I stood in the middle of a staircase and had to throw the read sheets, do not take it amiss of me; onto the steps; if I wanted to take the further letters out of the envelopes. The whole staircase up and down was high covered with these read letters and the loosely superimposed, elastic paper rustled mightily. It was a true wish-dream. But today in the day I had to draw the postman here quite differently. Our postmen are so unpunctual. Only at 1/4 to 12 did the letter come, ten times the most various people were sent from my bed out onto the stairs, as if that could lure him up, I myself was not allowed to get up, but at 1/4 to 12 the letter was then really there, torn open and read in one breath. I was unhappy over your being ill, but—now my nature reveals itself—I would have been unhappier if you in good health had not written to me. But now then we have each other again and want, after a good handshake, each to make the other healthier and then to go on living together in health. — Again I answer nothing, but answering is precisely the affair of spoken speech, through writing one cannot become wise, at most receive an inkling of happiness. Besides, I shall very likely write to you again today, even if I also

must still run about a great deal today and shall write down a little story which occurred to me in the misery in bed and most inwardly oppresses me. Your Franz

(in the margin) (Do not be uneasy, I shall under no circumstances telephone, do not do it either, I could not bear it.)

18.XI.12 (night of the 17th to the 18th of November) My dearest, it is half past one at night, the announced story is still by far not finished, not a line has been written today on the novel, I go to bed with little enthusiasm. Had I the night free, so as to be able, without laying down the pen, to write straight through till morning! It ought to become a beautiful night. But I must go to bed, for last night I slept badly, today by day almost not at all, and in an all too pitiful condition I must not after all go to the office. Tomorrow your letters, dearest, dearest! If I am halfway awake, then they strengthen me without doubt, but if I am in a daze, then I should like best, sunk down in the armchair, to sit over them continually and bare my teeth at every disturber. No, about the office I certainly do not get too much upset, I recognize the justification of the agitation from the fact that it has already outlasted five years of office life, of which, to be sure, the first year was a quite especially dreadful one in a private insurance institution, with office hours from 8 in the morning till 7 in the evening, till 8, till half past 8, pfui devil! There was there a certain spot in a little corridor that led to my office, in which almost every morning a despair fell upon me that for a stronger, more consistent character than I am would have sufficed more than abundantly for a downright blissful suicide. Now it is naturally much better, they are even, quite undeservedly, amiable to me. Even my highest director. Recently in his office, head to head, we read poems of Heine from a book while in his anteroom servants, office chiefs, parties perhaps with the most urgent matters waited impatiently to be admitted. But it is nevertheless bad enough and is not worth the strength that one must expend upon it even merely to endure it. You are not, in the end, annoyed at this sort of letter paper, it occurs to me now? The letter paper of my sister I used up a few days ago and I myself have hardly ever possessed any. So I tear out of my travel diary of this year one sheet after another and am shameless enough to send it to you. But I try to make up for it again by sending you along a sheet, which has just fallen out of the notebook, with a song that in this year’s sanatorium they often sang in chorus in the morning, with which I fell in love and which I copied out. It is of course very well known and you no doubt know it too, do read it over once again. And send me the sheet back again in any case, I cannot do without it. How the poem, despite complete emotion, is built quite regularly, each stanza consists of an exclamation and within it of an inclination of the head. And that the sorrow of the poem is truthful, that I can swear. If only I could retain the melody of the song, but I have no musical memory at all, my violin teacher out of despair in the music lesson preferred to have me jump over sticks that he himself held, and the musical progress consisted in his holding the sticks higher from lesson to lesson. And therefore my melody to the song is very monotonous and actually only a sigh. Dearest! Franz

(Telegram. Handed in at Prague on 18.11.1912, 2:30)

urgent = rp 10 urgent felice bauer berlin imnnanuel kirchstrasze 29 are you ill = kafka + +

18.XI.12 Dearest, I have deserved this telegram! You were certainly absolutely prevented on Saturday from writing and in and of itself I really had no claim either to get a letter today, these accursed Sundays are already beginning to become a regular misfortune of our communication — but from the long earlier waiting I was, after all, a little beside myself, yesterday’s letter had not quite satisfied me, especially since it dealt with your suffering condition, but now you had promised me, with a definiteness such as hardly ever before, for Monday one or two letters and none came, I walked about the office quite confused, a hundred times I pushed away a book in which I was supposed to read something (Decisions of the Administrative Court, so that you know), a hundred times I drew it uselessly nearer again, an engineer with whom I had to negotiate about an exhibition undoubtedly took me for imbecilic, for I stood there and thought of nothing else but that just then it was the time of the second post, indeed that it was even already threatening to pass by, and in my lostness I looked continually and obtrusively at the small, somewhat crooked finger of this engineer, that is, precisely at what I ought not to have looked at — Dearest! I will not go on telling it, it would grow worse and worse and finally become unbearable even to read. And even telegraphing has not proved itself as I thought. I handed in the telegram, an urgent one, at 3 o’clock and only at 11¼ in the night did the answer come, that is after 8 hours, a single journey to Berlin does not take so long and in doing it one is after all undoubtedly approaching Berlin, whereas for me the hope of getting an answer became smaller and smaller. But at last the ringing! Letter-carrier! Human being! And what a friendly, happy face he had. There could be nothing bad in the telegram. Of course not, there was only dear and good in it and so it looks at me even now, as it lies opened before me.

Dearest, where does one get the strength and how does one preserve consciousness, when one flies up out of this insane suffering into happiness? I had just seated myself before my story of yesterday with an unlimited longing to pour myself into it, plainly spurred on by all the desolation. Beset by so much, in uncertainty about You, wholly incapable of getting along with the office, in view of this novel that has been standing still for a day, with a wild wish to continue the new story, likewise admonishing, for some days and nights alarmingly close to complete sleeplessness and with several things less important but still disturbing and agitating in my head—in short, when today I was taking my now already only half-hour walk in the evening (always of course looking out for telegram messengers, I did meet one too, but far, far from my apartment) I was firmly resolved, as my only salvation, to write to a man in Silesia, with whom this summer I had become quite good friends and who for whole, long afternoons had wanted to convert me to Jesus. — But now the telegram is here and we shall leave that letter for a little while, You dearest temptation! Now I only do not know, shall I write the story in honor of the telegram or go to sleep. — And not a word of apology for the worries and unpleasantnesses that I have caused You with the telegram. Franz

19. XI. 12 Dearest, these are not reproaches, only requests and explanations, I become quite sad because I cannot find my bearings. It is quite right that we leave off the madness of the many letters, I myself began a letter about that yesterday and shall send it to you tomorrow, but this alteration of the letter-times can surely happen only by agreement, must surely be discussed and announced beforehand, otherwise one does after all go mad from it. How then am I to explain to myself that, according to your own communication, you received my last registered letter Friday morning or at least learned of it, that you nevertheless answered it only on Saturday, that in the Saturday letter you write, you would write once more on Saturday, but do not do it and on Monday I receive, instead of the promised 2 letters, none, that furthermore in the course of Sunday you did not write me one word, but only in the night the letter which does indeed make me happy, insofar as I am still capable of it, and that finally even on Monday you would not have written to me, would not have written at all, if I had not telegraphed, for your express letter is the only letter I have from Monday. But the strangest thing and

Frightening is this: you are ill for 1 1/2 days, and at the same time the whole week in rehearsals; although you are ill, you go dancing Saturday evening, come home at 7 o’clock in the morning, stay awake until 1 o’clock in the night and go Monday evening to a house ball. For heaven’s sake, what kind of a life is that! Explanations, dearest, please explanations! Never mind the flowers and books. It is, after all, nothing but my powerlessness. Franz

(On an enclosed sheet) As I now see, you did also in the Sunday letter definitely promise me a letter on Monday.

20. XI. 12

Dearest, what have I done to you, then, that you torment me so? Today again no letter, not by the first, not by the second post. How you make me suffer! When one written word from you could make me happy! You are tired of me, there is no other explanation, it is after all no wonder, only incomprehensible is that you do not write it to me. If I want to go on living, I must not, as in these endless last days, wait uselessly for news from you. But hope, of receiving news from you, I have no longer. I must therefore the farewell, which you give me silently, expressly repeat to myself. I should like to throw my face onto this letter, so that it cannot be sent away, but it must be sent away. I therefore wait for no more letters. Franz

Probably night from the 20th to the 21st of November 1912) Dearest, my dearest, it is 1:30 in the night. Have I hurt you with my letter of this morning? What do I know, after all, of the obligations that you have toward your relatives and acquaintances! You torment yourself and I torment you with reproaches on account of your torment. Please, dearest, forgive me! Send me a rose as a sign that you forgive me. I am not actually tired, but dull and heavy, I do not find the right words. I can only say, stay with me and do not leave me. And if any one of my enemies out of me writes you such letters as the one of this morning was, then do not believe him, but look through him into my heart. It is indeed such a bad, heavy life, how can one even want to hold a human being with mere written words, for holding there are hands. But in this hand I have been allowed to hold yours, which I absolutely need for life, only for three moments, when I entered the room, when you promised me the journey to Palestine, and when I, fool that I am, let you step into the lift. May I therefore kiss you? But on this wretched paper? I might just as well tear open the window and kiss the night air. Dearest, do not be angry with me! I ask nothing else of you. Franz

(Letterhead of the Workers’ Accident Insurance Institute) (21 November 1912) Dearest! poor child! You have a pitiful and extremely inconvenient lover. If for two days he gets no letter from you, he lashes about him, even if only with words, senselessly, and in the moment cannot grasp that he is hurting you by it. But afterward, certainly, remorse seizes him, and you need not be anxious that the unrest caused in you by him would not be avenged on him down to the smallest twitch of your mouth. Dearest, after your two letters today you seem still to want to endure me a little while, please, please, do not change your opinion even after my letter of yesterday. I shall, incidentally, probably still ask your forgiveness today by telegraph. But only understand my worry about you, the dreadful impatience, the burning of the one thought in my head, the incapacity to carry out even the least thing not connected with it, this life in the Bureau, the glances directed continually at the door, behind the closed eyes in bed the unbearable imaginings, the sleepwalking and indifferent stumbling in the streets, the heart that no longer beats but is only a tugging muscle, the half-destroyed writing—understand all this and do not be angry. Now I do have the explanation for your not writing, but just listen: on Monday I did not receive a single letter, the letter that in your opinion should have come on Monday must have been posted Saturday evening, so this letter has in any case been lost, I received only on Sunday your Saturday-morning letter; what was in this Saturday-evening letter, write it to me, if you still know it, so that at least in memory I may sweeten the bad Monday for myself. So then on Monday I had no letter, Tuesday only the Sunday letter and the express letter extorted by force, but on Wednesday there was again no letter there. That was for me really too much already, and I wrote yesterday’s letter only in order to get rid of a small part of these feelings bursting me apart. Consider that for me there really was no other explanation than that either, by virtue of a curse pursuing me, you wanted of your own will to make an end, or else, what was the same thing, that your mother had forbidden you to write, this mother who, I still remember exactly, in your first letters appeared to me in so friendly a light, when she waved after you from the balcony, when she complained about your meager breakfast, when she called you home by telephone because you stayed too long in the Bureau, and who for me gradually became darker and darker, when she demanded needlework for the birthday, when she did not rightly value your Bureau work, when she forced you to visits in your opinion superfluous, when she caused you a “deathly fright” when she entered the room in the evening while you were writing in bed, and some other things besides. And so I bit fast into these two sole explanations,

could not get away from it and therefore wrote that letter. Now I see that undoubtedly the Berlin holiday, which indeed I need only have read off from the calendar, was to blame for my receiving Your Tuesday letter only today, Thursday. So once again everything for which I am to blame has been made good again by Your kindness, and may I in one kiss forget these days and all that was sad? But it also almost seems to me that some one of my letters must have gone astray. Since Friday (8 November), according to my approximate reckoning, I have certainly written You 14 or 15 letters, and on Tuesday You are supposed to have received only one letter? To make a spot check, write me whether You have received the letters in which I enclosed something and which for that reason I remember definitely. In one letter there was an old letter enclosed, which in its time was not sent off and began with the comic form of address from immemorial time, “Gracious Miss,” in the second letter there was a printed slip enclosed with the description of the noise in my apartment. Yes, I have indeed read the Strindberg quotations and do not understand at all that I should not have written You about them. They are terrible truths and it is admirable to have spoken them out so freely, but there are times when one fears feeling still more terrible truths rumbling within oneself. Great is the truth of the fact that one guards oneself quite differently when one loves, one avoids many thoughts, does not want to hear many words, and some things that earlier, in distraction, one took in, one feels as a boring. Only a lighter diet one can almost impossibly introduce, and wine one replaces by fruit juices, if one drinks at all, which one does only seldom. I eat three times a day, in the interval nothing at all, not the slightest thing. Early compote, cakes and milk. At 2:30, out of child-love, the same as the others, only on the whole somewhat less than the others and in detail still less meat than little and more vegetables. In the evening at 9:30 in winter yogurt, Simon’s bread, butter, nuts of every kind, chestnuts, dates, figs, grapes, almonds, raisins, pumpkins, bananas, apples, pears, oranges. Everything is of course eaten by selection and not perhaps all mixed together as though thrown into me out of a cornucopia. There is no meal that would be more stimulating for me than this one. Do not insist on the superfluous 3 bites, see, everything is eaten for Your welfare and these 3 bites would be for my woe. About Your letters have no worry, they are the only thing that within the enormous disorder of my writing desk is ordered and locked away, and as often as I take them out — it truly does not happen seldom — they are put back again in order. — God, I still have so much to say to You and to answer, and again it is the end and besides already 3 o’clock. So tomorrow the rest. Yes, if You drop the letter in Saturday morning, I shall have it Sunday and Sunday will be several times more beautiful than otherwise. Franz

(Postscript above the letterhead I shall, after all, rather not telegraph. It would frighten you uselessly. The 4 letters that you must have received today probably balance one another out in good and evil. — Did you appear as Humor? Is there a picture of it? About my picture tomorrow.

21. XI. 12 My dearest, now I have your telegram and see the damage I have done. Already as I was leaving the office I sent you an enormous express letter and only in my absentmindedness forgot also to post it “registered.” In view of your telegram I now become afraid that this express letter, to make the misfortune complete, perhaps will not arrive, for the post is really persecuting us and the post-office girl to whom I the

gave in the letter was quite disorderly and erratic: For that reason, then, I am sending this registered letter too, in haste, if I am not even allowed to telegraph. I hope you receive both and accept them reconciled and kindly. It is terrible that our correspondence drives itself onward in this way through catastrophes. There is surely already just enough torment in the being-apart itself, why these blows on top of it! You telegraph that you had written to me on Monday too, then you must therefore mean another Monday letter than that express letter, which after all I have already acknowledged. If this is the case, then not only your second Saturday letter, but also this first Monday letter would have been lost. That would truly be dreadful. One can indeed have such letters searched for, and I could have done it also with regard to that old lost letter, but it would not be possible without your being troubled with the taking of statements, and so I left it alone then and will probably rather leave it alone this time too. In the time during which some postal official questions you, you can surely better send me a little fresh greeting, and the old letter would, despite all questioning, remain lost. Now the bad thing, however, is that not only I am quite shattered by all this and only slowly raise myself up by your wonderful letters of today, but that in a crude way I have made every provision to draw you into this suffering with me. You will write to me again, won’t you? Franz

21.XI.12 Dearest, it is a piece of good fortune that I did not write to you two hours ago, otherwise I should have written things about my mother on account of which you would have had to hate me. Now I am calmer and may write to you with better confidence. It does not yet look good in me, but it will come right, and what would not come of itself will do so out of love for you. My guilt in the fact that Mother was able to read one of your letters is unforgivable and deserving of blows. I think I already wrote to you that I have the habit of carrying your letters about with me, a strengthening went over from them continually into me, I went about as a better, more capable human being. Naturally I no longer carry all the letters about with me as in those first, wretched times, but the last or the last two still, at any rate: that is what caused the misfortune. At home I wear another jacket and hang the jacket of my street suit on the clothes-rack in my room. Mother went through my room when I happened not to be in it—my room is a passage-room, or rather a connecting road between the living room and my parents’ bedroom—saw the letter showing from the breast pocket, drew it out with the importunity of love, read it and wrote to you. Her love for me is just as great as her lack of understanding toward me, and the ruthlessness which passes out of this lack of understanding into her love is possibly still greater and for me at times quite incomprehensible. I took your letters of today as a whole and your counsels concerning eating and sleep did not especially astonish me, though properly they really ought to have done so, since I had after all already written to you how glad I am to have found the present way of life, which is the only halfway satisfactory solution of the contradictions in which I must live. But when Max today made to me even only quite a delicate allusion about the keeping of letters and how his things are never safe from his parents—his father’s searching and investigating in all the corners of the rooms is positively already known to me from observation—then, with these remarks, all the corresponding remarks from your letters of today ran together for me, for your letters were to me, as always, so this time too, as present as the expression on the face of the person with whom I am speaking—and soon I did not know everything, certainly, but enough to force Max to say everything.

I cannot ask you for forgiveness, for how could even you, kindest one, forgive this. This guilt I shall keep then and shall carry it about with me: Everything was already so good, I was already glad to be able to enjoy in peace the happiness that you are for me, I already saw in your remark about the Christmas holidays an infinite hope, which in this morning’s letter, in the filth of the office, I did not at all dare to touch, and — there my mother crosses my path again. I have always felt my parents as persecutors, until perhaps a year ago I was toward them, as perhaps toward the whole world, indifferent as some lifeless thing, but it was only suppressed fear, worry and sadness, as I now see. The parents want nothing but to drag one down to themselves, into the old times, out of which one would like, drawing breath, to rise up, out of love they want it of course, but that is just the dreadful thing. I stop, the end of the page is an admonition, it would become too wild. Yours, yours, yours. (On an enclosed sheet) 21.XI.12 I enclose a photograph of myself, I was perhaps 5 years old, the wicked face was then a joke, now I take it for secret seriousness. But you must send it back to me again, it belongs to my parents, who after all have everything and want to reach into everything. Just today I had to write to you about your mother!) Until you send it back to me, I shall send you still others and finally a bad, good-for-nothing present one, which you can keep, if you want. Five years old I probably was not yet in this photograph, perhaps rather 2, but you, as a friend of children, will be able to judge that better than I, who before children prefer to close my eyes. Franz To ask you for your photograph or to ask you for the lending of a photograph would of course just now be the most unsuitable moment. I merely note that.

22.XI.12 Dearest! I have no time to ask your forgiveness for the suffering I caused you Thursday and which shows itself in your letter today in such a way that even a blinded fool would have to take pity on it. But not I, I go on sinning and what I do is transformed into an hostility toward you, while nevertheless again in the other reality I would have wanted to throw myself down for you, as if I had from all time been in the world only for your sake. Nor is it enough, either, that I leave your letter in my pocket, that my mother reads it and writes to you. It would after all have been a guilt with which I could at last have been satisfied. But a guilty man twists himself ever more deeply into his guilt. Yesterday in Max’s presence the matter seemed to me bad, yet bearable; I promised him, if indeed I did not swear it, that I would say nothing to my mother. And even if I had not sworn it, out of consideration for you it would have been self-evident. But how do I summon the calm for considerations, even for what is dearest. Already when, away from Max, I took a little walk, it began to boil in me, my head was full of rage as of steam and when I came home I was convinced that, if I did not speak my mind, I should never be able to say another word to Mother. There were guests there, the bridegroom and one of his friends. I went straight as a line into my room in the exact foreknowledge that I would not be able to endure it there, I was astonished that the apartment held together, so taut was everything in me. In the anteroom Mother began, with some sort of presentiment, to shuffle up and down. We came together just as it could not be otherwise and I told her what I thought, told it to her in an almost wholly unrestrained outburst. I am convinced it was good for both of us, for Mother

and me, I would not know that I had ever in my life spoken with her so amicably as afterward. So much coldness or false friendliness as I have always had to bring toward my parents, (through my fault and through theirs) I have not been able to observe in any other related or acquainted family. I can see in Mother, despite her care, the happiness that she feels over our present relation after yesterday’s bad evening. Here You were certainly a good angel as for me everywhere. But that is not what is at issue now. For Your sake I ought to have said nothing to my mother and yet I did it. Dearest, will You be able to forgive me this too? I shall soon have loaded myself with so much guilt toward You, that for that reason even human judges will regard me as Your debtor-servant, which before the higher judges I have long since already been. Have I still a right to accept the kiss of reconciliation that You give me at the close of Your letter, especially since it would then become a kiss that would allow neither Your nor my letter ever to close. Franz

About Nornepygge I do not like to speak, the book is the only one of my works that has become wholly alien to me. I thank you for your kind interest. With cordial greetings, devotedly yours, Max Brod

23.XI.12 Dearest, my God, how I love you! It is very late in the night, I have laid aside my little story, on which, to be sure, I have done no work at all for two evenings already and which in the silence is beginning to grow into a larger story. To give it to you to read, how am I to do that? even if it were already finished? It is written quite illegibly and even if that were no obstacle, for I have certainly not spoiled you up to now with beautiful handwriting, still I do not want to send you anything to read. Read it aloud to you I want to. Yes, that would be beautiful, to read this story aloud to you and in doing so to be compelled to hold your hand, for the story is a little dreadful. It is called “Metamorphosis,” it would give you a good fright and you would perhaps decline the whole story, for fright it is, after all, that I unfortunately must make for you daily with my letters. Dearest, let us begin with this better letter-paper also a better life. I have just caught myself, while writing the previous sentence, looking quite straight up into the height, as if you were in the height, if only you were not in the height, as unfortunately is really the case, but there with me in the depth. It is however in fact a depth, do not deceive yourself about that, the more calmly we shall write to one another from now on — may God finally grant us that — the more clearly you will see it. But if you then nevertheless stayed with me! Now perhaps it is the destiny of calm and of strength to remain there where the mournful unrest and weakness begs. I am too gloomy now and perhaps ought not to have written to you at all. But the hero of my little story has had far too bad a time of it today too, and yet it is only the last step of his misfortune, which is now becoming permanent. How am I, then, to be especially cheerful! But if my letter were to be only an example of the fact that you too should not tear up the least scrap that you have once written for me, then it is nevertheless a good and important letter. Do not believe, by the way, that I am always quite so sad, I am not, after all, except for one point I have at least to the utmost in no respect anything to complain of, and everything except that one, without exception black, point can indeed still become good and beautiful and, with your goodness, glorious. On Sunday I want, if the time and the capacity should be there, properly to pour myself out before you about it, and you may then, your hands in your lap, look at the great distribution of gifts. Dearest, now however it is off to bed, may a beautiful Sunday be allotted to you and to me a few of your thoughts. Franz

24.XI.12 (begun in the night from the 23rd to the 24th of November 1912) Dearest! What an exceptionally disgusting story this is, which I am now laying aside again in order to recover myself in the thought of You. It has now already advanced a bit beyond its halfway point and in general I am not dissatisfied with it either, but disgusting it is without limit, and such things, you see, come from the same heart in which You live and which You tolerate as a dwelling. Do not be sad about that, for, who knows, the more I write and the more I free myself, the purer and more worthy I shall perhaps become for You, but certainly there is still much to be thrown out of me and the nights cannot be long enough for this, moreover, extremely voluptuous business. Before, however, I now go to sleep (it is really 3 o’clock at night, otherwise I work only until 1 o’clock, the indication of time in one of my last letters you seem to have misunderstood, it meant 3 o’clock in the afternoon, I had simply remained in the office and was writing to You), I want, because You ask it and because it is so simple, still to say into Your ear how I love You. I love You, Felice, in such a way that, if You remain preserved for me, I should want to live eternally, though, what must not be forgotten, as a healthy human being and one equal to You. So it is, then, so that You know it, and that is indeed already almost beyond kisses and, in recognition of this, there would remain to me almost no other sign than merely to stroke Your hand. And for that reason I prefer to call You Felice rather than Dearest and rather You than Beloved. But because I want to refer as much as possible to You, I also gladly call You Dearest and am happy to be permitted to call You at all.

Sunday (the 24th of November 1912) after lunch Two letters! Two letters! Where is the Sunday that could, as the continuation of such an introduction, correspond to it. But now, dearest, since you have not only forgiven me this too, but have also understood it, let us, Felice, shall we not, whatever may happen, remain calm and love each other without disturbance. If only I had the strength to make you fresh and merry again by letters, as I unfortunately had weakness enough to make you tired and sad to the point of weeping by letters. I almost have the confidence for it. But if I succeed in it, then I owe it again only to the strengthening consciousness of having you as my friend and of being able to rely on a human being such as you are. Only please, dearest, please, do not write any more at night, I read these letters purchased with your sleep only with a mixture of happiness and sorrow. Do not do it any more, sleep as beautifully as you deserve, I could not work calmly if I know that you are still awake and even on my account. But if I know that you are sleeping, then I work all the more courageously, for then it seems to me as if you were wholly given over to my care, helpless and in need of help in healthy sleep, and as if I were working for you and for your well-being. How should work falter with such thoughts! Sleep then, sleep, how much more, after all, you work during the day than I. Sleep without fail as early as tomorrow, write me no more letters in bed, already today if possible not, if my wish has strength enough. In return you may throw your supply of aspirin tablets out the window before going to sleep. So no more writing in the evening, leave the writing in the night to me, leave me this small possibility of pride in night work, it is the only one I have in relation to you, otherwise I should indeed become far too submissive and that would certainly not please you either. But wait a moment, as proof of the fact that night work everywhere, even in China, belongs to men, I shall fetch a book from the bookcase (it is in the next room) and copy out a little Chinese poem for you So here it is (what a noise my father is making with the nephew!): It comes from the poet JanTsen-Tsai (1716-17) about whom I find the note: “Very talented and precocious, he made a brilliant career in the civil service. He was extraordinarily versatile as a man and artist.” Besides, for the understanding of the poem the remark is necessary that well-to-do Chinese perfume their bed with aromatic essences before going to sleep. For the rest the poem is perhaps just a little improper, but it amply replaces propriety with beauty. Here it is then at last: In Deep Night In the cold night I have over my

over the book forgotten the hour for going to bed. The perfumes of my gold-embroidered bedcover have already flown off, the fireplace is no longer burning. My beautiful friend, who with difficulty had until then controlled her anger, tears the lamp away from me and asks me: Do You know how late it is? Well? That is a poem one must savor. Besides, with this poem three things occur to me, without my wanting to examine the connection further. First, it pleased me very much that You are in Your heart a vegetarian. The real vegetarians I actually do not love so very much, for I too am almost a vegetarian and see in it nothing especially lovable, only something self-evident, but those who in their feeling are good vegetarians, but out of health, indifference and underestimation of food altogether, eat up meat and whatever there happens to be as if incidentally with the left hand, those are the ones I love. A pity that my love for You has hurried itself so precipitately that it leaves no room any more to love You still on account of Your eating. And this folly of mine, sleeping with the window open, You have it too then? It is open the whole year? Even in winter? And completely? There You would outdo me, for in winter I leave it open only very little, a small crack wide. To be sure, my window looks out on a large, empty building site, behind which the Moldau flows past. And behind this come immediately heights with public gardens. There is therefore much air and wind and cold, and even if You now still leave the window wholly open at night in Immanuelkirchstraße, it is still not at all certain that You would do it also in a room that is situated as mine is. Besides, I still defeat You in this, that my room is not heated at all and yet I write in it. Now I even notice (I am sitting close by the window) that the inner window is wholly open and the outer only hastily closed, while on the railing of the bridge below there lies not snow but hoarfrost. Now just try to come

and to collect them. Almost every other day I find in the newspaper a notice of this sort, positively intended for me alone, but I have not the perseverance to begin such a collection for myself, let alone then to continue it for myself. For you, however, I do it with pleasure; do it then, if it pleases you, from your side for me. Such notices, which are not intended for all readers, but only draw certain readers here and there, without the uninvolved judge being able to discover the reason for the special interest, surely exist for everyone, and such little notices, which particularly trouble you, would have more value for me than my own collection, which I could therefore send you without great regret. Understand me rightly, only small cuttings from daily newspapers is what I mean, mostly about actual events, cuttings from magazines would be only rare exceptions, you must not believe that I want to tear up your beautiful notebooks for myself. Besides, I myself read only the Prager Tagblatt and that very cursorily, and among magazines the Neue Rundschau and then also Palestine, which, however, is no longer sent to me, although I am still a subscriber. (Probably this magazine believes that on our evening together with the one issue at that time it accomplished more for me than for other subscribers with a whole year’s volume, and that is indeed correct. In order to send at once, at the beginning of the collection, a solid contribution, I enclose also the report about a hideous trial. Now that I have once spoken of the journey to Kratzau, the vexatious thought no longer leaves me. My little story would certainly have been finished tomorrow, and now tomorrow evening at 6 I must go away, arrive at Reichenberg at 10, travel early at 7 to Kratzau to court, and have the firm intention, in the matter concerned, a rather difficult and risky one, of disgracing myself so unequivocally and energetically that no one shall ever again send me away on such assignments. Besides, I hope to be back in Prague already Tuesday at 4 o’clock in the afternoon, where I shall at once run to the Bureau, in any case (but without the slightest excitement, without the very slightest excitement) to look whether there is a letter from you there, in order then, satisfied with a letter, composed without a letter, to go home and throw myself into bed. If this plan is to succeed, I must of course be finished at court in Kratzau with my affair in 3 hours at the latest, but I am thinking, when the end of the third hour approaches, of gradually sinking into unconsciousness and having myself carried to the train with all haste. In the court record there will then stand in place of my signature: “The representative of the Workers’ Accident Insurance Institute (not Company, dearest!) fell unconscious and had to be removed. How doubly alive I shall then become in the train and race to Prague! Ah, I still have so much to say to you and so much to ask you, and now it is already so late and I can do no more. This morning I was at Baum’s (do you know Oskar Baum?) as every Sunday and read aloud (Max was there too with his bride) the first part of my little story. Afterwards a young lady came there, who in some small particular of her manner reminded me of you. (For it does not take much to remind me of you.) As if enchanted I looked at her and would gladly, after I had exhausted with my eyes the little resemblance, have gone to the window, in order to look out, to see no human being, and to belong wholly to you. With my mother I am on very good terms. Even a good relation is forming between us, the common blood seems to be acquiring a meaning, she seems to love you. She has already written you a letter too, but I did not let it go off, it was too humble, it was as I would have demanded it on that bad evening, and that would not have been good. She will soon write you a calm, friendly letter, I believe. So I am not to get a picture? And the humor was not photographed? What a strange company, to let that escape them? And there are no group photographs from the Bureau? Views of the Bureau premises? Of the factory? of Immanuel-Kirch Street? Prospectuses of the factory? The address of the Prague branch? In what does your work consist? Every small thing from the Bureau interests me (in contrast to my Bureau). What pretty turns of phrase there are

there are at your place. You are in the registry? What is that, actually? How can you dictate to two girls at the same time? If you send me anything pretty from your office, I shall send you annual reports of my institution with enormously interesting essays by me. And now I embrace you in farewell. Franz

24.XI.12 Out of special cunning—and in order to distinguish myself before my beloved by cunning I am sending off each sheet of this Sunday letter (there are five) in a separate envelope, it is because of the post that persecutes us, which surely will not be able to lose all the letters (even if, since today is Sunday, they cannot be registered). To be sure the danger is again greater that by this method one sheet or another will be lost, well, I am doing what I can and do not want by uttering further fears to summon up the danger. Wednesday, dearest, you will probably get no letter from me, rather a picture postcard, but that perhaps rather to your apartment, so that the little lady does not become attentive. Please write me quite exactly whether you are well; These headaches! This weeping! This nervousness! Dearest, I beg you many times, sleep properly, go walking, and if in reading my letter you see some annoyance approaching, which I out of imprudence have neglected to remove, please tear up the letter ruthlessly, but calmly, calmly! Nothing depends on a letter, I shall write you ten for the one and if you tear up the 10, I shall write 100 in replacement. Your Franz Whether you ought not rather to go to a sanatorium in the summer. I shall describe the life there to you soon very enticingly. You, have you once looked about to see whether the Jews are playing in Berlin, I think it must be so. Unfortunately I have not yet answered Löwy, in what I wrote you in the first letter, that namely I am an unpunctual letter-writer, nothing has changed up to today. The yearbook (Arkadia) will appear in February at the earliest. My book (Meditation) appears next month or in January. You will of course receive both at once after their appearance. In the Flaubert (L’éducation sentimentale) I intentionally wrote nothing, it is a book into which no foreign writing belongs. Besides, however, I do not know at all whether I am capable of writing anything more to you that could show itself before the world. Yours

25.XI.12 Sunday night (night from Sunday the 24th to Monday the 25th of November 1912) Now today, dearest, I must lay aside my little story, on which today I have not worked nearly so much as yesterday, and let it rest for one or even two days because of this damned Kratzau trip. I am so sorry, even if hopefully it will not have any all too bad consequences for the story, for which I still need 3–4 evenings after all. By the not all too bad consequences I mean that the story has already been damaged enough, unfortunately, by my manner of working. Such a story ought to be written down at most with one interruption in two times 10 hours, then it would have its natural pull and storm, which it had last Sunday in my head. But I do not have at my disposal two times ten hours. So one must merely try to make the best possible thing of it, since the best is denied one. But a pity that I cannot read it aloud to you, a pity, a pity, for instance every Sunday morning. Not in the afternoon, then I have no time, then I must write letters to you. Today I really wrote until 1/4 7 in the evening, then lay down in bed, although actually I should first have dropped the letters in, but I feared—to get to bed too late then and no longer be able to sleep, for once the evening company next door is together, then, for sheer card-playing (to which perhaps some, to which I myself for my father’s sake have been able to force myself only extremely rarely) there is no more quiet for me. This anxiety, however, was unnecessary today, for, what I did not know, my parents and the youngest sister were in the evening at my married sister’s and the middle sister was visiting with her bridegroom at the future parents-in-law’s in the country. Now, however, I slept badly, evidently as punishment for nevertheless not having dropped the letters in beforehand, but would, since no one was in the apartment except the servant girl; she is 17 years old, but quiet as a shadow, be woken by no one, and so lay there half asleep and, because of the sepulchral cold of my room, had not even energy enough to stretch out my hand toward the clock. When at last I nevertheless did it, it was, to my horror, 1/2 10. Good God, if now the letters were dropped in too late. A furious two-minute gymnastics, as perhaps already once explained, at the wide-open window, then dressing and to the railway. Downstairs before the house, it is now locked in our somewhat deserted neighborhood already at 9 o’clock, I still succeeded, by quickly turning aside, in avoiding an encounter with my family, who were just going home, and now I flew to the railway. I have new boots now and tramp dreadfully through the empty streets. Hopefully the letters will at least arrive in time. Then after my immediate return there was, as always, my supper, my youngest sister sits there, cracks the nuts, eats more herself than she gives me, and we generally converse excellently. That is the supper, but then there are times when the dearest sister does not suffice and I do not suffice her. Franz

Shortly before the departure 24.XI.12 (25 November 1912) Dearest! How it throws one to and fro when one has something to care for. There have already been days when I calmly expected your letters, calmly took them in my hand, read them once, put them away, then read them again and put them away again, but everything calmly. But then there are again days, and such a one was today, when I already tremble with unbearable expectation that your letter will come, when I take it like something living and cannot at all let it out of my hand. Dearest, have you already noticed what incredible correspondences there are between our letters, how one asks for something which the next, on the other morning, already brings, how you

for example, how the other day you once demanded to hear that I love you and how I was forced, in the letter which in the night crossed with your letter on the Berlin line, to write you the answer, which indeed perhaps already stood in the opening words of my first letter or even already in that first indifferent glance with which I looked at you on our evening. But there have already been so many such coincidences that I have lost the overview of them. The most beautiful one, however, arrived today. As I wrote you yesterday, I am going away this evening, alone, in the night, into the mountains, and there you send me, without your expressly knowing it, the dear little companion. What a dear little girl that is! The narrow shoulders! So weak and easy to grasp she is! Modest she is, but calm: at that time no one had yet tormented her and made her cry and the heart beats as it should. Do you know that one easily gets tears in one’s eyes if one looks at the picture longer. Occasionally I am to send the — picture back? Good, that will be done. For the time being, however, it will make in this accursed breast pocket a small, uncomfortable journey in trains and through hotel rooms, although the girl, as she asserts, without so far having explained it, is accustomed to grow frightened in hotel rooms. Yes, the little watch-cord can be seen, the brooch is pretty, the hair so waved and almost too seriously arranged. And in spite of everything you are so easily recognizable again, with an expression on your face not at all so distant from this picture you were sitting then at the table in a moment which, before all others, I have exactly in my memory. You held one of the Thalia photographs in your hand, looked first at me, who was making some stupid remark, and let your gaze wander round the table in a quarter-circle and only came to a halt again at Otto Brod, who first gave the correct explanation of the photograph. This slow turning of the head and the naturally varied appearance of your face during it I have kept imperishably. And now comes the little girl, for whom I am of course an utter stranger, and confirms for me the truth of the dear memory. Again a coincidence occurs to me. Yesterday I asked you for printed matter, today you promise it to me. But this beating of the heart, dearest! How can it be true that I have a share in your heart, if it beats so, while I want it to be calm? Your Franz

(Picture postcard. Postmark: Kratzau — 26.XI.12) Warm greetings! An ugly journey, but a good traveling companion. F. Kafka

Kratzau, District Court 26.XI.12 Dearest, while the greedy opposing advocates behind me are tearing at one another over the highest bid (it does not matter if you do not understand the word) I am quite content to be sitting at this little table and to be able to greet you, Dearest, from the heart. Franz

(Picture postcard. Postmark: Kratzau — 26.XI.12) And so the little journey goes cheerfully on. Best greetings. F. Kafka

26.XI.12 Felice, I announce it, one of those letters is coming of which I wrote once recently that you should tear them up at the second or third sentence. Now is the moment, Felice, tear it up, but after all it is still my moment too, not to write it, but unfortunately you will read it just as surely as I shall write it. I have just come back from the journey, of course was first in the office and there received your dear letter of Sunday night. I read it in the porter’s lodge, whose little wife, while I was reading, looked up at me. Your letter is dear and good and true. (Only my age in the photograph is wrongly assumed, I was just 1 year old, as I have now learned.) You strive to let me take part in you, oh God, when I want every moment of your life. Nevertheless, you do what is only humanly possible, and already because of your goodness I would have to love you, if I did not love you for your whole dear being. Why then was I not satisfied with the letter and searched the porter’s table for another letter? Certainly you wrote that you would write me Monday and your Monday letter was indeed not there. But had you not already promised me several times that you would hold faithfully to me, had I not myself written recently that I would remain quite calm, even if no letter at all lay in the office, and now at any rate I did have your Sunday letter, and had you not finally Monday evening rehearsal, could therefore your letter not very easily have been posted a little too late? In any case, in the non-arrival of the Monday letter alone there was not the slightest reason for agitation. And why did I nevertheless run home frightened, at the same time convinced that I would find the Monday letter there and at the same time already hopeless over the disappointment surely to be expected. Why that, dearest? Does it not look like a lack of my love for you? For even if just now concern for your health too mixes into my unrest, still the concern for your love is much greater. And again and again the miserable turns of phrase slip into me like: that you should tolerate me a little while longer, that I should receive a few of your thoughts, etc., and if once a letter does not come, then telegraphing is to me a terribly slow asking. So horrified as at that time when you found a strange tone in my letter, I have probably been until now only once, but other small remarks frighten me enough already. I am frightened when I read that your mother wants to preserve you from disappointments, when I read of the acquaintance from Breslau, about whom to ask I have already for weeks held myself back, I am frightened when I hear that you love me, and if I should not hear it, I would want to die. Besides, you once wrote something similar, I could not understand how you came to the true judgment. That you felt it rightly would not have surprised me, for your feeling does not err, I know that well. Now all these contradictions have a simple and near cause, I repeat it, for it is forgotten so easily even by me, it is the condition of my health, nothing else and nothing less. I can write no more about it, but that is what takes from me the certainty toward you, throws me to and fro and then carries you along with it. Therefore above all things and not even so much out of love for you I need your letters and formally devour them, therefore I do not believe your good words enough, therefore I writ

completely opened, the snow flew into my face while I slept. Right at the beginning of the journey I sat opposite a repulsive woman and was restless with suppressed desire to thrust my fist into her mouth when she yawned. Your picture was looked at here and there during the whole journey for consolation, Your picture lay also in the night, for consolation, on the chair beside my bed. One should on no account go away and rather refuse obedience in the office, if at home one has a work that needs all one’s strength. This eternal anxiety, which incidentally I still have even now, that the journey will harm my little story, that I shall no longer be able to write anything etc. And with these thoughts to have to look out into wretched weather, run through mud, stick fast in mud, get up at 5 o’clock! In order to revenge myself on Kratzau, I bought there in the stationer’s shop the only good book that Kratzau at that moment possessed. A novella by Balzac. In the introduction, incidentally, it says that Balzac for years followed a special division of time which seems to me very sensible. He went to sleep at 6 in the evening, got up at 12 at night and then worked the remaining 18 hours. He did wrong only in drinking such a mad quantity of coffee and with it ruining his heart. — But on such a journey nothing at all is good. The Balzac novella did not please me. In the railway paper I even read, as an alleged utterance of Goethe’s, the nonsensical remark that Prague is “the most precious stone in the mural crown of the earth.” The loveliest thing on the journey was getting out in Prague, as in general my condition improved toward Prague. When I wanted to get out, a small child tugged at my collar, I turned round and saw behind me a young woman who was carrying her child on her arm. Again she reminded me very much of You, at least in the moment of first looking at her, and again not at all in the face or in any other single detail that one could have pointed to, but only in general and therefore especially irresistibly. Perhaps, however, I have the semblance of Your being continually before my eyes. Never has anyone helped this young woman out of the carriage with greater care than I did this time. Besides, one had to help her, since after all she was carrying the child before her and could not see the steps. Of course I want to hear of Your earlier journey and as much as possible! It already seemed to me strange enough at the time, to make such a journey for recuperation, on which You had no stay in the country at all and on the other hand also did not come into especially interesting or foreign cities. And if relatives want one to visit them, then they may first travel to the Riviera and invite one there. For the rest I even, though certainly very unobtrusively, pursued You a little on that journey. I have in Breslau also a good acquaintance (it is not that pious man of whom I once wrote, he is in the country, is a surveyor, his address I would first have to look up in the Bible which he gave me as a keepsake); this good acquaintance now, because of my laziness in writing, generally continues only in silence. At that time, however, when I could assume that You were in Breslau, I suddenly wrote to him after a pause of months, so that I might at least with a letter have some share in the Breslau in which You were just then living. I did not expressly say this to myself at the time, but it was nothing else and there was no great necessity for the letter, or rather none at all. Do You actually keep a diary? Or did You once keep one? And in connection with that the question: Why do You write nothing at all about Your friend, whom You did after all call such a good friend. Farewell, dearest. The threat which, just as it is written on the first pages, stands over us, we shall probably do best to leave undisturbed until the time when we shall be able to say the first real, not only written, word to one another. Is that not Your opinion too? I beg You not to regard today’s letter as a relapse, it is after all the new time, only made a little gloomy by the disturbance of my writing. Your hand, Felice! Franz

Is it so, that our mothers begin at the same time to concern themselves about us? Does your mother say good things about me or perhaps only middling things? And why did she remember me precisely when the acquaintance from Breslau was being spoken of? Please answer me all the questions!

(On an enclosed sheet) I must not forget how my actual commission for this journey was carried out, for that too is characteristic of the hostile character of this journey. I had, namely, success, or rather my institution had it. For whereas I had believed I would bring no more than 300 K, I brought close to 4500 K, that is about 4000 K more. “You should have defended yourself against the success,” I said to myself on the return journey at the sight of the crows over the snow-covered fields.

26.XI.12 Now late in the night the consolation occurs to me that your Monday letter perhaps has come after all and that they have only forgotten to give it to the porter. In that case I would get it at once early in the morning and at 10 perhaps another one again! The office becomes uglier through the counterimage of your letters, but through the fact that your letters come into the office, it becomes more beautiful again.

27.XI.12 Dearest, it was already a quarter of twelve in the forenoon, just then I had escaped my work a little, I was again almost quite exactly in the old agitation and began a letter, the first line of which I enclose. Then fortunately your card with the little picture came. (Your Monday letter too I received only today.) Yes, dearest, so it is good, that is what I want, only always the news at least, which once was promised, but this — and be it ever so small — unconditionally. I do not want, for instance, that you write to me in the night, and in this I do not give way and even believe that my middling writing yesterday was caused by this,

? deciphered any further, until now, when it stands in the light of the desk lamp, thus as in that sunlight of that time, it shows the dearest face in such deception that one would like to kiss the hand on the edge of the boat and does it too. At that time you did look better than today, but otherwise, perhaps from sheer well-being, you made an extremely peevish face. What were you holding in your hand? A strange little bag? And who had stuck the leaves into your belt? How cautiously and mistrustfully you look at me, as though you had a slight vision of that tormenting spirit who was to haunt you after 4 years. You were also very seriously dressed for a mere outing, your brother likewise. That your brother is handsome has already been told to me. How ridiculously young I would have to look beside him and yet I am probably older than he. And in the picture he is only 25 years old at that. You are certainly very proud of him. And now other pictures are even being held out to me, dearest, you must keep that promise. One cannot tell it from the envelope, tears the envelope open as though it were only a letter (some letters arrive positively open, that is due to the construction of the envelope) but there has been a picture inside and you yourself slip out, as one day in more beautiful days you will come before me out of the railway carriage. This flashlight photograph too, dearest, already belongs to me, be it for time or for eternity, however it may have turned out. In order to take every scruple from you (not, indeed, to cause you any scruples at all) I am sending you a flashlight photograph of myself. It is quite repulsive, but then it was not intended for you either, but for my control authorization for institutional purposes and is, incidentally, 2–3 years old.

A distorted face I do not have in reality, the visionary gaze I have only with flashlight, high collars I have not worn for a long time. On the other hand the suit is already that often-mentioned only one.(only one is of course an exaggeration, but not a great one) and I wear it today as cheerfully as then. I have already, in Berlin theatres, in distinguished seats, quite at the front in the Kammerspiele, made a sensation with it and slept through or dozed through several nights on the benches of railway carriages in it. It grows old with me. As beautiful as in the picture it naturally is no longer. The necktie is a splendid piece, which I brought back from a journey to Paris and not even from the second, but still from the first, whose year I cannot at this moment calculate at all. By chance I am wearing this tie just now too, while I write. It too is growing older. All in all I ask you only not to be frightened before the picture. There is only one good picture of me from more recent times (good is only the picture that shows one as one, if it absolutely cannot be otherwise, wants to look) but that is under a frame with other family pictures. But I shall have one made for you, if it is possible, so much does it matter to me, at least as a picture to be in your hand, in your real hand, I mean, for in your unreal hand I have long been.

That was written in the evening, now it is night, there where it is deepest. Dearest, did I not, although yesterday there was no letter, behave in exemplary fashion? so very much bound in trust to you, as if you had been beside me and had merely had your silent day. Besides, you certainly have no such days of mourning at all, for despite the crying — your only fault, incidentally a terrible temptation to draw you hastily to my breast — you surely have incomparably better command of yourself than I. Consider properly for once whether you could bear a human being who on some days and on the majority of days formally collapses into himself and is not to be moved from the spot. Such days there were, especially about a week ago, often, I do not know whether you recognized it in my letters. (about a week ago!) say in any case that it escaped you and that I suffer from imaginings. From your mouth, from which I expect all decisions about myself, it will calm me. Your celebration was magnificent beyond all measure. I do not know what this is due to, but the whole factory seems to me, despite all counterarguments of reason, despite your testimony not to be doubted, despite all the details that I know about it, wholly, but wholly (the writing paper of your horribly disorderly correspondent has just run out and all stationers are asleep) unreal. Perhaps it is due to this,— that I have surrounded you so firmly with wishes and hopes which do not fit into a real business operation at all, into an unreal one on the other hand fit excellently. That is why I also so gladly let myself be told about an office; if I had the innermost conviction that it surrounds you and lets you work, it would be an abomination to me. Shall I receive the views of the office premises? If I receive them, you receive, for instance, an annual report of our Institute with an essay by me on round safety-planer-knife shafts! With illustrations! Or even an essay on workshop insurance! Or on safety milling heads! Dearest, there are still many joys before you. But now I am going to bed. For I sleep rather too little lately, I also go walking rather too little, I read nothing at all, but sometimes I find myself not excessively bad. I play with thoughts of the Christmas holidays, of the long holidays and of the further years. If the prospect wants to become darker, I close my eyes. — Lest I forget it, I shall now as a rule write only once daily, they take the afternoons from me. But they give me kisses. Then I endure everything. Franz

(Czech letterhead of the Workers’ Accident Insurance Institute Úrazová pojištovna dìlnická) Dearest, only 2 words. Our elections, of which I perhaps wrote you, are over, my free office-time is at an end. I can only greet you in haste. Besides, I am wholly in the fog of a frightful sleepiness. Dearest, today you have wonderfully bestowed gifts on me and your morning letter has drawn me to you as if with hands. Till we meet in the night. It is so hard to wean oneself from the two letters daily. Tell me a remedy. Let me ask for the remedy with kisses and thank you with kisses. Yours,—as no other human being’s Franz

The annual reports are going off; until you know them by heart, you will receive others.

3.XII.12 Dearest, I really ought today to have held out through the night in writing. It would be my duty, for I am just before the end of my little story and unity and the fire of connected hours would do this end unbelievably good. Who knows besides whether tomorrow after the lecture, which I now curse, I shall still be able to write. Nevertheless — I stop, I do not dare. Through this writing, which after all in this regular connection I have not yet been carrying on for so very long, I have become, out of an official by no means exemplary, but quite serviceable for some things (my provisional title is Koncipist), a terror to my chief. My desk in the office was certainly never orderly, but now it is piled high with a wild heap of papers and files, I know approximately only what lies on top, below I merely suspect terrible things. Sometimes I almost believe I hear how I am being downright ground to pieces by writing on the one side and by the office on the other. Then there are again times when I balance both relatively, especially when I have written badly at home, but this capacity (not that for bad writing) is — I fear — gradually being lost to me. I look around in the office sometimes with looks which no one earlier would have thought possible in an office. My typist is still the only one who in such moments understands how to wake me gently. Then too your letters are now, since we love one another calmly, absolutely a help to life; someone and not only someone but the dearest cares for me and I spring up from your letter in a better condition to my work. But nevertheless, nevertheless today I have written you so little and have so much to say to you. How beautifully you stand in the sample room! But your office is missed. No, about the things you sent me today, most patient Felice, I shall have to question you for months. Above all explain to me a little the two allusions to you. The first surely refers to your Zionism, but the second with literature and frozen meat? God, how all these people from Salomon to Rosenbaum know you, how they may see you daily, how they drive with you in automobiles, how one need only press the button in the director’s office and you come running: Dearest, dearest, where is the bell that calls you to me? I fall upon you with kisses. And now enough. My story would not let me sleep, you bring me sleep with dreams. Yesterday I discussed with you in the grass a stay in the country together. Your Franz

4.XII.12 Thank God, dearest, that at the end of your letter you are calmer, I should not have known what to do for self-reproaches. For that I now promise you as beautifully as I only can — and I wish I had the mouth of Frl. Brühl, who kissed you during the writing, in order to be able to confirm it to you still better — that (for the sake of solemnity I write letter by letter) I shall never again torment you by letter, but shall save that for when we are together and every misdeed can at once and in the best way be made good and not only so primitively and late as through a following letter. You say it yourself, I do not want to torment you; you are indeed my own self and this I torment from time to time, it does it good, but you are my innermost and tenderest self and that I should indeed like, for all the world, to spare and to keep in the most perfect calm. And in spite of the best will — it must be the pen that in my hand goes its own evil ways. Dearest! Forgiveness and from now on calm letters, as is proper when one writes to the dearest, whom one wants to caress and not to whip. Last evening too I exaggerated, it occurs to me. Things are, after all, going with the office so passably. And even if I sit there as a creature of misery, after I have received and read your letter, I rise up as a giant and go as a zealous official to the waiting typewriter, quite as if you were leading me there and had promised me, if I should have worked well, a kiss as reward. Do not be sad, dearest! You had already succeeded in making me happy when you did not yet at all want to, how much more now. Adieu, dearest, can I then today not take leave at all? And now up to the typewriter! This is, by the way, the last second letter of the day, now there will always be only one. Explanation follows. I cannot get away from you, dearest, today. You pull your hand back, if I am so foolish. Franz

(Night of December 4 to 5, 1912) Ah dearest, infinitely beloved, for my little story it is now really already too late, just as I had fearfully divined, unfinished it will stare up to heaven until tomorrow night, for You however, Felice, childish lady, precisely now and always precisely now is the only right time. I take the telegram as a kiss and then it tastes good, makes glad, proud and haughty but as congratulations, dearest? Every other evening is more important than today’s, which after all was meant only for my pleasure, while the other evenings are appointed for my liberation. Dearest, you see I like reading aloud hellishly much, to roar into the prepared and attentive ears of the listeners does the poor heart so much good. But I also roared at them soundly and the music, which from the adjoining halls wanted to spare me the effort of reading aloud, I simply blew away. Do you know, to command people or at least to believe in one’s command — there is no greater comfort for the body. As a child — a few years ago I still was one — I liked to dream of reading aloud, in a great hall filled with people — to be sure equipped with a somewhat greater power of heart, voice, and mind than I had at the moment — the whole of Éducation sentimentale without interruption for as many days and nights as should prove necessary, naturally in French (oh you my dear pronunciation!) and the walls were to resound. Whenever I have spoken, speaking is probably still better than reading aloud (rare enough it has been) I have felt this elevation and today too I have not regretted it. It is — and in that forgiveness is to lie — the only, so to speak, public pleasure that I have almost granted myself for a quarter of a year. With strange people I have

really since that time almost not spoken at all. Only with the one Stoessl; your Schmitz, with whom I was to have got together about 14 days ago—it was almost exclusively the relation to you that attracted me in him—I slept through in bed. Do you know Stoessl? He is a splendid human being, the human-creative truly looks out of his face, which otherwise, with its abundance of blood and its hooked nose, could also belong to a Jewish butcher. (Wait, I have his picture here in a catalogue and shall enclose it at once.) I am talking a little disorderly stuff here, but if I might not do it before you, dearest, before whom then? Besides it certainly still comes from the reading aloud, of which remnants are still sticking in my fingertips. In order to have nothing conspicuous; but still unconditionally to have something of you at hand, I had taken your festival picture-postcard with me and had resolved, during the reading aloud, to let my hand lie quietly upon it and in this way by means of the simplest magic to be held by you. But when the story then went into my blood, I first began to play with the card, but then I was already pressing and bending it without consciousness, good that in place of the card it was not your dear hand, otherwise tomorrow you certainly could write me no letter and it would have been a much too expensive evening for me. But you do not yet know at all your one story (The Judgment). It is a little wild and senseless and if it did not have inner truth (which can never be generally established, but must again and again be newly granted or denied by every reader or listener) it would be nothing. Also it has, what with its smallness (17 typewritten pages) is hard to imagine, a great number of faults and I do not know at all how I come to present to you such an at least very doubtful birth. But everyone gives, after all, what he has, I the little story with myself as appendage, you the immense gift of your love. Ah dearest, how happy I am through you; into the one tear which at the end your story drove into my eyes, tears of this happiness too were mingled. Tell me, how do I make myself worthy only, for instance, of your letter today, say of its second sheet, which is filled only with torment criminally extorted by me? How I breathed again, when with the third sheet, with the memories of that journey not yet darkened by me, a little calm came over you. Just see how one plays with us human beings, you complain that you went away from Prague without anyone coming to the station for you, and I—I believe it at least today in recollection—I would have wanted to make the journey on the footboard of your carriage, in order to be able to look into your compartment. (But that is mad after all, I could have got in quietly—but in the alarmingly deep night, which it already is now, the most difficult thing—for the beloved done—does not seem difficult enough.) It just occurs to me: in one of your last letters you once wrote “you” instead of “me,” if only the slip of the pen could once become reality! (Quiet, quiet! I am already holding my tongue.)—So with the branch office I have caught you once—no denying! no denying!—an actual branch office you do not have in Prague then. The firm Adler I have of course long since discovered and every time I passed by I spat, for I thought it was a competitor of yours, just as I do before the shop of a certain Grammophone Company. By the way, is my advice being followed and a gramophone salon opened in Friedrichstraße? If that pays, then another could be opened somewhere in the West. In Paris, in the middle of the room, on a very elevated seat, sat an important lady and had nothing to do but with one hand to change the visitors’ money into tokens. How would it be if you, as the instigator of the matter in Berlin, got this post. I say it only because then with the other hand, unnecessary for the service, you could write letters to me the whole day. Dearest, what follies longing for you invents. Dearest, I become quite sad over myself. Had I struck together the time during which I have written letters to you and used it for a journey to Berlin, I would long since be with you and could look into your eyes. And here I fill letters with stupidities, as if life lasted forever and not one instant less long.

No, now I shall not go on writing any more, the desire has entirely and utterly left me, I am going to bed and shall say to myself Your name, Felice! Felice! which can do everything, excite and quiet. Good night and dream sweetly, as they say among us. Only one question still. How do you write in bed? Where is the inkwell? Do you hold the paper on your knees? I could not do it and Your handwriting is surer in doing so than mine when I sit at the desk. And does the bedcover get no inkblots? And the poor, poor back! And the dear eyes one inevitably ruins. And in reverse, as in China, here it is the man who wants to take the light away from his beloved. For that reason, however, he is not more sensible than the Chinese stay-at-home scholar (one always finds in Chinese literature this mockery of and respect for the “stay-at-home scholar” for that the beloved should write letters in the night, he does not want, but the night-letters themselves he tears greedily from the postman’s hand. Now farewell, dearest, one last kiss. I put my signature here. Franz and am alone. But I am not alone, for after all I may still kiss You behind the signature too, I think. Dearest, if at our real meeting I shall once take leave of You as heavily as now, You will see that the suffering I have caused You with my letters was a trifle compared with the troubles of actual intercourse with me. Adieu, dearest. The new letter from my last signature onward demands new kisses and takes them in thought. (In the margin) So no letter is coming today after all.

5.XII.12 Dearest, only greetings and thanks for the description of your room. Only the rear wall is still missing, there is probably still a door there. Have you many books? I had not written to you about the elections? Yes, yes. Probably in one of the many letters that have been lost. Now I remember, for instance, that I complained to you that your letters first have to be picked out of the enormous election mail and how long that takes. They are the elections to our board, which make quite a great deal of work, since all the employers insured with us (about 200,000) and all the workers (about 3,000,000) vote. This year I have shirked these labors and my arrears could pile up a little unnoticed. Now, however, one of them is already cracking here and there. Dearest, do not deny it, I seem to you quite strange in my picture. You do not want to admit it to yourself, but your letter bears witness against you. At least if one reads it with suspicion, as I did this time, I confess it. What am I to do? That is simply how I look. The picture is bad, but it is like me, in reality I look even worse. It is 2 years old, but my boyish appearance has hardly changed, though from the night-watches I am beginning, to be sure, to get a few repulsive wrinkles. Will you be able, Dearest, to accustom yourself to this picture? And may the man still kiss you, or must he sign himself unkissed? And consider, the picture is, after all, still bearable, but then, when the man himself steps forward. — In the end you will then run away from him. Consider, you have seen him only once, and by gaslight, and without paying particular attention to him then. But by day he scarcely comes out into the open and from that has got positively a night-face. I understand you so well. But perhaps you will accustom yourself to him after all, Dearest, for see, I too, the letter-writer, whom you have treated so well, has had to accustom himself to him.

I am indeed exaggerating in the foregoing, your letter is dear as always, but the moods go up and down in me and today the bad one is simply on top. Forgive us both, the letter-writer and the photographed one, and let us through our twofold form profit also in kisses. Dearest, adieu, I am quite calm, be so too and keep me dear. Your Franz

Today, however, it is really the last second letter of the day. God, already again a journey threatens me.

from the 6th to the 7th.XII.12 (presumably in the night from the 5th to the 6th of December 1912) Weep, dearest, weep, now the time for weeping is here! The hero of my little story died a while ago. If it consoles you, then learn that he died peacefully enough and reconciled with everyone. The story itself is not quite finished yet, I have no real desire for it now any more and hate the ending until tomorrow. It is already very late too and I had enough to do overcoming yesterday’s disturbance. A pity that in many places in the story my states of fatigue and other interruptions and cares not belonging to it are clearly drawn in, it could certainly have been worked more finely, one sees that precisely on the sweet pages. That is just the eternally boring feeling; I myself, I with the shaping powers that I feel in me, quite apart from their strength and endurance, would under more favorable circumstances of life have brought to completion a purer, more striking, more organized piece of work than the one that now lies before me. It is a feeling that no reason can talk one out of, although of course no one other than reason is right, which says that one, just as there are no other circumstances than the actual ones, can also reckon with no others. However that may be, tomorrow I hope to finish the story and the day after tomorrow to throw myself back upon the novel. My poor dearest, you want to know when your letters arrive, in order to arrange yourself accordingly? But the post is quite incalculable, especially the Austrian, it works completely improvised, somewhat like the joke-post at summer entertainments. Your first express letter came to my apartment Monday at 11 o’clock, your second came Wednesday between 9 and 10 to the office. On account of my letter in which I deplore my appearance, I am still afraid even now. God knows how you will laugh at me! And every moment I fear receiving a telegram: “Franz, you are beautiful.” Then I would have nothing to do but crawl under the table. Look, happy girl, how in the enclosed newspaper clipping, although it was after all only a private event, your little story is publicly and exaggeratedly praised. And it is no indifferent person who wrote that, but Paul Wiegler. Do you know him? He has written a few beautiful books and translated a few French ones still more beautifully. What is enviable about him is that already in February he is coming to Berlin, and I? To be sure, he is coming as theater critic to the Berl. Morgenpost and that again is not enviable. Everyone has his sorrow. Ah dearest, it is high time to close and to kiss, otherwise my chief will step between us and that must be prevented. Dearest, dearest! Still these two cries. Your Franz Yesterday was the last second daily letter, today is the very last.

I am just signing a letter to the husband of your travelling companion, who called you little angel, you little angel. About the photograph, which is enormously important and instructive for me, I shall write to you in the night. Monday I have to go to Leitmeritz. What did little Brühl say to my picture postcard? Did you receive my two cards? But now it occurs to me that your letter is of the 4th, how is that, it was Wednesday — but nonsense, I am mistaken in the date, now I was already thinking again that at that time you had not yet had my photograph. from the 6th to the 7th.XII.12 Dearest, then listen, my little story is finished, only today’s ending does not make me at all glad, it might certainly have been better, there is no doubt of that. The next thought adjoining such sorrow of course always remains: I have you, after all, dearest, therefore a second justification for living, only it remains a disgrace to fetch the justification for living merely from the existence of the beloved. Now I remember in time that this, however, is to be a Sunday letter and that one had better leave complaints for Monday. Dearest, I do not know why, but your walk along the Stadtbahn has moved me beyond measure. What derisive laughter there must be on high, if perhaps at the same time your lonely walks are compared with mine and the glances are allowed to wander from one to the other. This photograph, dearest, brings you again a great, great piece nearer to me. I should take it for quite an old picture. (You write nothing to explain the picture and perhaps want to lure me into a trap; but happiness and gratitude make me bold and I am not afraid.) The whole thing, moreover, in the lighting, grouping and mood of those pictured, looks quite mysterious, and the key to the mystery, which lies in front on the table beside the box belonging to it, does not make the matter any clearer. You are smiling wistfully, or it is my mood which imputes this smile to you. I may not look at you properly, otherwise I cannot get my gaze away from you. You are wearing a strangely bedecked blouse. On your left forearm you have a cord or a bracelet. Apart from my judgment, which here is really not at all authoritative, you are, even for other observers, not only because of your position in the center of the picture, but also because your mother has taken hold of you under the arm or because at least it has that appearance. That gives you a special significance. Besides, you have quite a different direction of gaze from the rest of the family. Of all the others your mother stands closest to me (even at the risk that your mother is not in the picture at all). The judgment about her is for that reason a little uncertain; because the most and most differentiated light falls on her face. Is she not a large, somewhat bony woman? In my father’s family there are women who seem remotely similar to her. She looks very intelligent, I almost return to my first opinion about her, with her I should dare to speak. Your father looks very dignified, before him I should already be more uncertain. What sort of business does he actually have? Your brother I know already from the picture from Binz, I see nothing new about him. At the edge there are probably your sisters (the guessing is made easier by the fact that your brother is not married), the elder one I call the Budapest woman and the cheerful man beside you your Budapest brother-in-law. They are the only ones who actually laugh, therefore they belong together. The girl at the other edge could be the phlegmatic sister, to judge by her self-satisfied, somewhat sleepy smile. (If a twenty-year-old girl, with decisiveness, reads absolutely nothing, I find nothing evil in that, half-reading is worse.) And in what sort of room are you now? Is that your present living room and this the table at which in one of your letters father and brother

Were they playing 66? And who is photographing you all? Is it some family celebration? Father and brother seem to be dressed in dark clothes and have white ties, but the alleged brother-in-law has a colored one. Dearest, how powerful one is in relation to pictures and how powerless in reality! I can easily imagine that the whole family steps aside and withdraws, that only you alone remain behind and that I lean across the large table toward you, in order to seek your gaze, to receive it and to perish with happiness. Dearest, pictures are beautiful, pictures cannot be done without, but they are also a torment. In a bad foreboding I have just gone to look how late it is. A quarter past three! That is too much. But then I also only began with my work after 12. Good night, Dearest. And keep loving me! Next week you will get my little book (Contemplation). How many kisses I wonder I shall get for it? Beautiful occupation for dreams. Dearest, let that be the last word, Dearest! Your Franz

Merely for control of the post I mention it, today I received only the express letter with the photograph.

Night from the 6th to the 7th.XII.12 (probably in the night from the 7th to the 8th of December 1912) Dearest, for various reasons I have written nothing today. There were a couple of letters to be written, a petition for the office, the necessity of preparation for the stupid Leitmeritz journey, besides, I had gone to sleep only after 7 o’clock in the evening and had awakened only at 11 at night, finally the Leitmeritz journey, probably despite devilish haste, costs me a working night, and the novel hardly taken up would then have to be put away again – in short there are some reasons why I have not continued it today. But not the least important reason for it is that today I have a quite particularly restless longing for You. Whether You are only well? Whether You do not have all too much to object to in me? Whether precisely today You care much about me? Dearest, I have probably dreamed of You during the whole sleep today, but only two dreams are memorable to me. Immediately after waking, despite strong resistance, I tried to forget them, for there were terrible truths importunate and overclear in them, such as in the duller day-life can never break through. I will tell them only quite superficially and briefly, although they were very tangled and full of details, which even now threaten in me. The first attached itself to Your remark that you can telegraph directly from the office. I could therefore also telegraph directly from my room, the apparatus even stood beside my bed, probably in the way You are accustomed to move the table up to the bed. It was an especially prickly apparatus and I was afraid, just as I am afraid of telephoning, of this telegraphing too. But I had to telegraph to You in some overgreat worry about You and in a wild longing, certainly tearing me up out of bed, for an immediate message from You. Fortunately my youngest sister was there at once and began to telegraph for me. My worry about You makes me inventive, unfortunately only in dreams. The apparatus was so constructed that one had only to press a button and immediately the answer from Berlin appeared on the little paper strip. I remember how, stiff with suspense, I looked at the little strip which at first unwound quite blank, although this was not to be expected otherwise, for so long as they had not fetched You to the apparatus in Berlin, no answer could indeed come. What joy it was when the first written characters appeared on the little strip. I really ought to have fallen out of bed, so strong is the joy in my recollection. There now came a real letter, which I

could read quite exactly, the greatest part of which I could perhaps even remember, if I had any desire to do so. So I will only say that in the letter I was scolded, in a dear way that made me happy, on account of my unrest. I was called an “Insatiable,” and the letters and cards were enumerated which I had received recently or which were on the way. In the second dream you were blind. A Berlin institute for the blind had made a joint excursion to a village in which I was living with my mother for the summer. We were occupying a little wooden house, the window of which is exactly in my memory. This little house lay in the midst of a large estate-complex situated on a slope. To the left from the little house there was a glass veranda, in which the greatest part of the blind girls was accommodated. I knew that you were among them and had my head full of unclear plans as to how I could contrive to meet you and speak with you. Again and again I left our little house, crossed the plank that had been laid before the door over the marshy ground, and, without having seen you, returned again and again undecided. My mother too went about aimlessly, she had on a very monotonous dress, a kind of nun’s habit, and her arms laid against her breast, even if not exactly crossed. She made claim to receiving various services from the blind girls and in this respect preferred a girl in a black dress with a round face, one of whose cheeks, however, was so deeply scarred as though it had once been completely mangled. Mother praised to me also the cleverness and readiness of this girl, I looked at her expressly too and nodded, but thought only that she was your colleague and would surely know where you were to be found. Suddenly all comparative quiet was at an end, perhaps the signal for departure was blown, in any case the institute was to march farther on. Now, however, my decision too was made, and I ran down the slope, through a little door breaking through a wall, since I believed I had seen that the departure would take place

(Sunday, December 8, 1912) Ah Dearest, although my piety has been driven off into quite other regions, for Your letter today I would have a mind to thank God on my knees. Whence comes once again this unrest about You, this feeling of the most useless sojourn in rooms in which You are not, this neediness for You without limits! The only good thing about tomorrow’s journey, for which I must moreover still prepare myself properly, is that I shall be a few railway hours nearer to You. Besides, tomorrow afternoon, if all goes well, I shall be back in Prague, from the station to our porter there will be a storming assault. Letters, letters from You! Today I am planning a most peculiar division of time. It is now 3 o’clock in the afternoon. Last night I got to bed only at 4 o’clock, but in return stayed there until 11:30. Again Your letter was to blame for it. Usually I have to stay in bed so long in order to wait for it, today, however, it came as an express letter (since it has now once happened, I should almost like to say, Sunday letters ought always to be sent express) I received it so early that it was still too early to get up and now, in the after-enjoyment of the letter, I stretched myself out for hours more from sheer happiness. Now then I shall go for a walk, which in the proper sense I have not done for a couple of days, shall then at 6 o’clock lie down to sleep and, if it is possible, sleep until 1 or 2 o’clock at night. Perhaps then I shall get the novel in hand again and then comfortably write until 5 o’clock in the morning, not longer, for at quarter to 6 in the morning my train goes. Dearest, please spare Yourself. Up again until 3 o’clock. It cannot possibly be the proper meaning of the Chanukah festival to make You dead tired. So You are a speaker? Just look! Did I not say it once before?. Will the prologue also have reference to Ruth? “Ruth” was the name of the air-hut in which I lived in the last sanatorium. Through the three weeks’ living in a hut over whose door “Ruth” stood, relations to this name have formed themselves for me and I would like to know it publicly spoken and praised by You. — Only one thing more, on suitor’s feet I am not going, if I were doing it, I would not have to envy any painter (who admittedly in the self-portrait looks like a criminal ape), but could let myself be envied by the whole world. Franz

Dearest, you already trust very strongly in our concord of thought (as it appears, with reason) when in the letter that I receive Sunday you admonish me not to have sent off express the letter that you are to receive Sunday. But it was indeed only the sweet drowsiness and therefore for the one far away a particularly clear sign of your warm life.

7.XII.12 (8 December 1912) Dearest, only a quick greeting and the request to be allowed to complain and weep a little at your breast. Through a few unfortunate accidents it has happened that I have come home only at 1/2 8, of sleep or at least of falling asleep there is no longer any thought, for the family noise will begin at once, something for my court hearing I must also still study, the long petition is also still to be written, in short this night will once again be thrown to the robber world and only you Dearest remain my great consolation. I am tired, weak, my head is buzzing and so I ask — it is boundlessly arrogant, I know — do you kiss me, here at the end of this sad letter, Dearest! Dearest! So now the day is over, for what still follows is worth not a word. Franz

Sections from the “Gothic Rooms,” which are, to be sure, infinitely dear to me, though perhaps for special reasons. Heartfelt greetings F. Kafka

(Postcard. Postmark: Leitmeritz - 9.XII.12) Before the journey home, thank God. The most, most absolutely necessary post is indeed waiting for me, undone, unopened. Most heartfelt greetings FK

from the 9th to the 10th of XII, ’12

My dearest, how these accursed interruptions harm my work, it is enough to make one melancholy. Only yesterday I held myself back from working with difficulty, then the journey intervened, and already today I have written very moderately, even if fortunately only a little. No, not speak of it at all! What reconciles me to the journey is only this, that it was useless for the Institute too, though of course on the other hand that again hurts me. In the end the whole journey shrank down to a visit to relatives — I have relatives in Leitmeritz — for the hearing at which I was to represent the Institute was postponed three days ago for an indefinite time, without — as the result of an error in the court office — our Institute having been informed of it. Seen from that, it takes on a special significance how I there in great haste almost still in the night march off from home, wander through the lanes in a fine cold — past the breakfast room of the “Blue Star,” already lit, to be sure, but curtained, now indeed someone again looks in longingly, but no one any longer out onto the lane — how I then further take part in this night journey on the railway among sleeping gentlefolk, who do sleep, to be sure, but still have enough misdirected consciousness to keep turning back, out of their sleep, the heating which I keep setting to “cold” to “warm” again and again and to overheat still further the overheated compartment, how I then finally for half an hour drive in a country carriage through misty avenues and fields or meadows merely sprinkled with snow — and always uneasy, always uneasy, even if it were only about the dullness of my gaze with which I look at all this. Then at last at 8 o’clock in the morning I am in front of the business of my relatives in the Long Lane in Leitmeritz and enjoy in my uncle’s office, still familiar from childhood (actually a step-uncle, if there should be any such thing), the freshness and undeserved superiority that proceeds from a traveler who comes to someone who has only just crawled out of bed and in felt slippers, in the scarcely opened cold shop, tries in vain to warm himself. Then came the aunt (to be exact, the wife of my true uncle, who died many years ago, and who after his death married the manager, this very step-uncle), now a sickly, but still very lively, little, round, shouting, hand-rubbing person, always agreeable to me. But now I must let her go on making noise here, for in the next room it is striking 3 o’clock in the morning and the child must go to sleep. Dearest, about your letter of today I have so much to say to you! Please do not look on me as any sort of miracle, for the sake of our love, do not do that. It then looks, you see, as if you wanted to remove me from you. I am at bottom, so far as it depends only on me and so long as you do not show yourself near me, a very poor and unhappy human being; what is extraordinary in me is so for the greatest part in the bad and sad sense and consists, as at the beginning of your letter you correctly sensed without thinking it through to the end, consists chiefly in this, that I do not, instead of uselessly traveling to Leitmeritz, with

can travel to Berlin with the most unequivocal intention. Dearest, draw me then as near to you as this sad exceptionalness of mine permits. And do not speak of something great that is lodged in me, or do you perhaps consider it something great that because of the two-day interruption of my writing I spend these two days in the unremitting fear of no longer being able to write, a fear, moreover, which, as this evening has shown, was not so entirely senseless. And on our evening, was the fiddling about with the cardboard box anything other than coquetry, anxiety and probably social despair and comfort in it. Certainly you recognized it then too, even if unconsciously, but today the memory is clouding over for you, it must not. And to blame for everything is, I should almost like to say, this stupid photograph, which I hesitated so long to send off and which now on the one hand has harmed me, on the other hand, however, has still not been of any use to me, for I still do not have your last photograph, although it must have been finished long ago. Dearest, near you shall take me to you, near, near, as near as I press myself to you, as I was to you during the whole journey, in the train, in the carriage, at the relatives’, at court, in the street and in the field. In the compartment I pushed my neighbor in thought down off the bench, set you down in his place and now each of us in his corner quietly looked at the other. What is it really with your looking unwell, Felice? What does Mother demand of you? (To that you must answer at once and precisely!) To what does she trace the bad appearance? What does she want to have changed? And what in your opinion is the reason? And are you already reconciled with Mother? You seemed to me uneasy in today’s letter. And despite the fact that you seemed uneasy to me, I am so blockheaded as to give you useless lessons on the preceding pages. But now I am talking myself into uneasiness. Dearest, surely there is nothing serious the matter with you? Please answer all these questions quite precisely. Everything else on the earlier pages is of no consequence, regard it as crossed out, answer only this! What would I do, then, if you became ill! Dearest, about this I must know everything, that is my most important affair. Once more: I am not yet uneasy, but I would become so if you do not answer precisely. You are, after all, my dearest. Franz
