The other day You asked me once why I maintain that I have fear of You. I knew, as usual, nothing to answer You, in part precisely because of the fear that I have of You, in part because, for the justification of this fear, too many details belong to it for me, in speaking, to be able even halfway to hold them together. And if I try here to answer You in writing, it will nevertheless be only very incomplete, because even in writing the fear and its consequences hinder me in relation to You, and because the magnitude of the matter goes far beyond my memory and my understanding.

To you the matter has always presented itself as very simple, at least insofar as you have spoken of it in front of me and, without distinction, in front of many others. It seemed to you to be something like this: you have worked hard your whole life long, sacrificed everything for your children, above all for me, as a result I have lived “in luxury and plenty,” have had complete freedom to study whatever I wanted, have had no occasion for worries about food, therefore for worries at all; for this you have demanded no gratitude, you know “the gratitude of children,” but still at least some sort of meeting halfway, some sign of sympathy; instead of this I have always hidden away from you, in my room, among books, among crazy friends, among extravagant ideas; openly I have never spoken with you, in the temple I did not come to you, in Franzensbad I never visited you, otherwise too I have never had any family feeling, I have not troubled myself about the business and your other affairs, I saddled you with the factory and then left you, I supported Ottla in her obstinacy and while for you I do not lift a finger (I do not even bring you a theater ticket), I do everything for friends. If you sum up your judgment of me, the result is that although you do not reproach me with anything actually indecent or evil (with the possible exception of my last intention to marry), you do reproach me with coldness, estrangement, ingratitude. And indeed you reproach me with it as though it were my fault, as though I could perhaps, with a turn of the steering wheel, have arranged the whole thing differently, while you have not the slightest fault in it, unless it were that you have been too good to me.

This usual presentation of Yours I consider correct only to the extent that I too believe You are entirely blameless for our estrangement. But just as entirely blameless am I. If I could bring You to acknowledge that, then—not perhaps a new life would be possible, for that we are both much too old, but still a kind of peace, no cessation, but still a mitigation of Your unceasing reproaches.

Some inkling of what I want to say You strangely enough have. Thus, for example, You said to me recently: “I have always been fond of you, even if outwardly I was not toward you as other fathers are accustomed to be, precisely because I cannot dissemble as others can.” Now I, Father, on the whole have never doubted Your goodness toward me, but this remark I consider incorrect. You cannot dissemble, that is correct, but to want to maintain for this reason alone that the other fathers dissemble is either mere insistence on being right, not further discussable, or else—and this in my opinion is really what it is—the veiled expression of the fact that between us something is not in order and that You have helped cause it, but without guilt. If You really mean that, then we are agreed.

I do not of course say that what I am, I became only through your influence. That would be very exaggerated (and I even incline to this exaggeration). It is quite easily possible that, even if I had grown up entirely free of your influence, I still could not have become a man after your heart. I would probably still have become a weakly, anxious, hesitant, restless person, neither Robert Kafka nor Karl Hermann, but still quite different from what I really am, and we could have got on excellently with one another. I would have been happy to have you as a friend, as a boss, as an uncle, as a grandfather, yes even (though already more hesitantly) as a father-in-law. Only precisely as a father you were too strong for me, especially since my brothers died young, the sisters came only long afterward, I therefore had to endure the first blow quite alone, and for that I was much too weak.

Compare the two of us: I, to put it very briefly, a Löwy with a certain Kafka substratum, which however is not set in motion by the Kafka will to live, to do business, to conquer, but by a Löwy spur, which works more secretly, more timidly, in another direction, and often stops altogether. You, on the other hand, a real Kafka in strength, health, appetite, power of voice, gift of speech, self-satisfaction, superiority to the world, endurance, presence of mind, knowledge of men, a certain generosity, naturally also with all the faults and weaknesses belonging to these advantages, into which your temperament and sometimes your quick anger drive you. You are perhaps not wholly Kafka in your general view of the world, so far as I can compare you with Uncle Philipp, Ludwig, Heinrich. That is strange, I do not see quite clearly here either. They were after all all more cheerful, fresher, less constrained, more light-living, less strict than you. (In this, incidentally, I have inherited much from you and have administered the inheritance much too well, without, however, having in my nature the necessary counterweights, as you have them.) Yet on the other hand you too have gone through different periods in this respect, were perhaps more cheerful before your children, especially I, disappointed you and oppressed you at home (when strangers came, you were, after all, different), and now perhaps have become more cheerful again, since the grandchildren and the son-in-law give you again something of that warmth which the children, except for Valli perhaps, could not give you. In any case we were so different and in this difference so dangerous to one another, that, if one had perhaps wanted to calculate in advance how I, the slowly developing child, and you, the finished man, would behave toward each other, one could have assumed that you would simply stamp me down, that nothing of me would remain. That now did not happen, what is living cannot be calculated, but perhaps something worse happened. In which connection, however, I ask you continually not to forget that I never in the remotest degree believe in any guilt on your part. You had the effect on me that you had to have, only you should stop considering it a special malice on my part that I succumbed to this effect.

I was a timid child; nevertheless I was certainly also stubborn, as children are; certainly Mother spoiled me too, but I cannot believe that I was especially difficult to guide, I cannot believe that a friendly word, a quiet taking-me-by-the-hand, a kind look, could not have exacted from me everything one wanted. Now at bottom you are indeed a kind and soft-hearted man (what follows will not contradict this, for I am speaking only of the appearance in which you affected the child), but not every child has the endurance and fearlessness to go on seeking so long until it reaches the kindness. You can treat a child only as you yourself are constituted, with strength, noise and sudden anger, and in this case that seemed to you, moreover, also for this reason very well suited, because you wanted to bring up in me a strong, courageous boy.

Your methods of upbringing in the very earliest years I can of course not describe directly today, but I can approximately imagine them by inference back from the later years and from your treatment of Felix. Here it must be taken into account, as making matters worse, that you were then younger, therefore fresher, wilder, more original, still more unconcerned than today, and that besides you were wholly bound to the business, could scarcely show yourself to me even once in the day, and therefore made an all the deeper impression on me, which scarcely ever flattened out into habituation.

Directly I remember only one incident from the first years. You perhaps remember it too. Once in the night I kept on whimpering for water, certainly not from thirst, but probably partly in order to annoy, partly in order to entertain myself. After several strong threats had not helped, you took me out of bed, carried me onto the balcony and left me there alone before the closed door for a little while, standing in my shirt. I do not want to say that that was wrong, perhaps at that time the night’s rest really could not be obtained in any other way, but with this I want to characterize your methods of upbringing and their effect on me. I was then afterwards no doubt already obedient, but I had an inward damage from it. The self-evidence, for me, of the senseless asking-for-water and the extraordinarily terrible nature of being-carried-out I could, according to my nature, never bring into the right connection. Even years later I suffered under the tormenting idea that the gigantic man, my father, the final instance, almost without reason could come and carry me in the night out of bed onto the balcony and that I was therefore such a nothing for him.

That was at the time only a small beginning, but this feeling of worthlessness which often dominates me (in other respects, to be sure, also a noble and fruitful feeling) derives in many ways from Your influence. I would have needed a little encouragement, a little friendliness, a little keeping-open of my path, instead You blocked it for me, with the good intention, certainly, that I should take another path. But for that I was not fit. You encouraged me, for example, when I saluted well and marched, but I was no future soldier, or You encouraged me when I could eat heartily or even drink beer with it, or when I could sing after You songs I did not understand or parrot back to You Your favorite phrases, but none of that belonged to my future. And it is characteristic that even today You actually encourage me in something only when You Yourself are affected, when it is a question of Your own self-esteem, which I injure (for example through my intention to marry) or which is injured in me (when for example Pepa abuses me). Then I am encouraged, reminded of my value, referred to the matches I would be entitled to make, and Pepa is wholly condemned. But quite apart from the fact that at my present age I am already almost inaccessible to encouragement, what help would it be to me, if it occurs only where in the first instance it is not a matter of me.

Then, and then everywhere, I would have needed encouragement. I was, after all, already cast down by Your mere physicality. I remember, for example, how we often undressed together in a cabin. I thin, weak, narrow, You strong, large, broad. Already in the cabin I seemed to myself miserable, and indeed not only before You, but before the whole world, for You were for me the measure of all things. But if we then stepped out of the cabin before the people, I at Your hand, a little skeleton, uncertain, barefoot on the planks, in fear of the water, incapable of imitating Your swimming movements, which You with good intention, but in fact to my deep shame, were continually demonstrating to me, then I was very desperate and all my bad experiences in all fields came magnificently together in such moments. I was most at ease still when You sometimes undressed first and I could remain alone in the cabin and could postpone the disgrace of public appearance so long, until You finally came to look and drove me out of the cabin. Grateful I was to You for the fact that You did not seem to notice my distress, also I was proud of my father’s body. Besides, this difference between us still exists today in much the same way.

Corresponding to this, further, was Your intellectual supremacy. You had worked Your way up so high by Your own strength alone, consequently You had unlimited confidence in Your opinion. For me as a child this was not even so dazzling as later for the growing young man. In Your armchair You ruled the world. Your opinion was right, every other was crazy, overwrought, meshugge, not normal. At the same time Your self-confidence was so great that You did not have to be consistent at all and yet did not cease to be right. It could also happen that in a matter You had no opinion at all and consequently all opinions that were in any way possible with regard to the matter had to be, without exception, wrong. You could, for example, rail against the Czechs, then against the Germans, then against the Jews, and indeed not only selectively, but in every respect, and in the end no one was left except You. For me You took on the enigmatic quality that all tyrants have, whose right is founded on their person, not on thinking. At least it seemed so to me.

Now you did, in fact, retain the right against me astonishingly often, in conversation that was self-evident, for it hardly ever came to conversation, but also in reality. Yet even that was nothing especially incomprehensible: I stood, after all, in all my thinking under your heavy pressure, also in the thinking that did not agree with yours and especially in this. All these thoughts, apparently independent of you, were from the beginning burdened with your dismissive judgment; to endure that until the complete and lasting execution of the thought was almost impossible. I am speaking here not of any lofty thoughts, but of every little undertaking of childhood. One had only to be happy about some matter, to be filled with it, to come home and say it, and the answer was an ironic sigh, a shaking of the head, a tapping of the finger on the table: “I’ve seen something finer too” or “Tell me your troubles” or “I haven’t got such a rested head” or “Buy yourself something with it!” or “Some event!” Naturally one could not demand enthusiasm from you for every childish trifle, when you lived in worry and toil. That was not what it was a question of either. It was rather a question of this, that you always and on principle had to prepare such disappointments for the child by virtue of your contrary nature, further that this opposition, through the accumulation of material, strengthened itself unceasingly, so that finally it asserted itself also by habit when for once you were of the same opinion as I, and that finally these disappointments of the child were not disappointments of ordinary life, but, since it was after all a question of your person, decisive for everything, struck to the core. The courage, the resolution, the confidence, the joy in this and that did not hold out to the end, if you were against it or even if your opposition could merely be assumed; and it could probably be assumed in almost everything that I did.

That applied to thoughts as well as to people. It was enough that I had a little interest in a person — as a result of my nature it did not, after all, happen very often — for You, already without any regard for my feeling and without respect for my judgment, to intervene with abuse, slander, degradation. Innocent, childlike people such as, for example, the Yiddish actor Löwy had to pay for that. Without knowing him, You compared him, in a dreadful way which I have already forgotten, with vermin, and, as so often for people who were dear to me, You had automatically at hand the proverb about dogs and fleas. I remember the actor here especially because I noted down Your pronouncements about him at the time with the remark: “So my father speaks about my friend (whom he does not know at all) only because he is my friend. I shall always be able to hold that against him when he reproaches me with a lack of filial love and gratitude.” Always incomprehensible to me was Your complete insensibility to what suffering and shame You could cause me with Your words and judgments, it was as if You had no idea of Your power. I too have surely often hurt You with words, but then I always knew it, it pained me, but I could not control myself, could not hold back the word, I regretted it already while I was saying it. But You struck out with Your words without further ado, no one was pitied by You, not during it, not afterward, one was completely defenseless against You.

But such was your whole upbringing of me. You have, I believe, a talent for upbringing; to a person of your kind you could certainly have been of use through upbringing; he would have seen the reasonableness of what you said to him, troubled himself about nothing further and quietly carried the things out in that way. For me as a child, however, everything you called out to me was nothing less than a commandment from heaven, I never forgot it, it remained for me the most important means of judging the world, above all of judging yourself, and there you failed completely. Since as a child I was together with you chiefly at meals, your instruction was to a great extent instruction in correct behavior at table. What came onto the table had to be eaten up, the quality of the food was not to be spoken of — but you often found the food uneatable; called it “the swill” — the “beast” (the cook) had spoiled it. Because, in accordance with your powerful hunger and your special preference, you ate everything quickly, hot and in large mouthfuls, the child had to hurry, gloomy silence was at table, interrupted by admonitions: “first eat, then speak” or “faster, faster, faster” or “you see, I finished eating long ago.” Bones one was not allowed to gnaw apart, you were. Vinegar one was not allowed to slurp, you were. The main thing was that one cut the bread straight; that you, however, did this with a knife dripping with sauce was a matter of indifference. One had to take care that no scraps of food fell to the floor, under you in the end lay the most. At table one was allowed to concern oneself only with eating, but you cleaned and cut your nails, sharpened pencils, cleaned your ears with the toothpick. Please, Father, understand me rightly, these would in themselves have been completely insignificant details, they became oppressive for me only because you, the person so enormously authoritative for me, did not yourself keep to the commandments you imposed on me. Through this the world was divided for me into three parts, into one where I, the slave, lived, under laws which were invented only for me and which, moreover, I did not know why, I could never fully comply with, then into a second world, infinitely remote from mine, in which you lived, occupied with governing, with issuing orders and with annoyance at their not being obeyed, and finally into a third world, where the other people lived happily and free from orders and obeying. I was continually in disgrace, either I obeyed your orders, that was disgrace, for they applied, after all, only to me; or I was defiant, that was also disgrace, for how could I be defiant toward you, or I could not obey, because for example I did not have your strength, not your appetite, not your skill, although you demanded it of me as something self-evident; that was indeed the greatest disgrace. In this way the child’s reflections did not move, but its feeling did.

My situation at that time will perhaps become clearer if I compare it with Felix’s. You treat him too, after all, in a similar way, yes, You even use a particularly terrible means of education against him, in that, when at table he does something, in Your opinion, unclean, You do not content Yourself, as You did then with me, with saying: “You are a great pig,” but add besides: “a genuine Hermann” or “exactly like your father.” Now perhaps this really does Felix no essential harm — more than “perhaps” one cannot say — for to him You are indeed only an admittedly especially important grandfather, but still not everything, as You were for me, besides Felix is a quiet, already now in a certain sense manly character, who may perhaps be bewildered by a thunderous voice, but cannot be determined by it for long, above all, however, he is after all only comparatively seldom together with You, is indeed also under other influences, You are to him more something like a dear curiosity, from which he can choose what he wants to take for himself. To me You were no curiosity, I could not choose, I had to take everything.

And indeed without being able to bring forward anything against it, for it is from the outset impossible for you to speak calmly about a matter with which you do not agree or which simply does not proceed from you; your domineering temperament does not allow that. In recent years you explain this by your nervous heart condition, I would not know that you had ever been essentially otherwise, at most the nervous heart condition is for you a means for the stricter exercise of domination, since the thought of it must choke off the last contradiction in the other person. That is of course no reproach, only the statement of a fact. With Ottla, for instance: “One simply cannot speak with her at all, she jumps straight in one’s face,” you are in the habit of saying, but in reality she originally does not jump at all; you confuse the matter with the person; the matter jumps in your face, and you decide it at once without hearing the person; whatever is still brought forward afterward can only irritate you further, never convince you. Then one hears from you only: “Do what you want; as far as I am concerned you are free; you are of age; I have no advice to give you,” and all that with the terrible hoarse undertone of anger and of complete condemnation, before which I tremble less today than in childhood only because the child’s exclusive feeling of guilt has in part been replaced by the insight into the helplessness of us both.

The impossibility of calm intercourse had still another, actually quite natural consequence: I unlearned speech. I would no doubt in any case not have become a great speaker, but I would surely have mastered the ordinarily fluent human language. You, however, forbade me the word very early. Your threat: “not a word of contradiction!” and the hand raised with it have accompanied me from the very beginning. Before you — as soon as it is a matter of your own affairs, you are an excellent speaker — I acquired a halting, stammering manner of speech, even that was still too much for you, finally I was silent, at first perhaps out of defiance, then because before you I could neither think nor speak. And because you were my real educator, this had its after-effect everywhere in my life. It is altogether a curious error, when you believe that I never submitted to you. “Always everything against” was really not my principle of life toward you, as you believe and reproach me with. On the contrary: had I followed you less, you would certainly be much more satisfied with me. Rather, all your educational measures hit their mark exactly; I evaded no grip; as I am, I am (apart of course from the foundations and the influence of life) the result of your education and of my obedience. That this result is nevertheless painful to you, indeed that you unconsciously refuse to acknowledge it as the result of your education, is due precisely to the fact that your hand and my material were so foreign to one another. You said: “Not a word of contradiction!” and meant thereby to silence the counterforces in me that were unpleasant to you, but this influence was too strong for me, I was too obedient, I fell entirely silent, hid myself away from you and only dared to stir when I was so far removed from you that your power, at least directly, no longer reached. But you stood before it, and everything again seemed to you to be “against,” whereas it was only the self-evident consequence of your strength and my weakness.

Your extremely effective rhetorical means in bringing me up, at least against me never failing, were: scolding, threatening, irony, malicious laughter and — strangely enough — self-lamentation.

That You directly and with express words of abuse had abused me, I cannot remember. It was also not necessary, You had so many other means, also in conversation at home and especially in the business the abusive words flew down around me in such quantities upon others that as a small boy I was sometimes almost stunned by them and had no reason not to apply them to myself too, for the people whom You abused were certainly not worse than I, and You were certainly not more dissatisfied with them than with me. And here too there was again Your enigmatic innocence and unassailability, You abused without giving Yourself any scruples on that account, indeed You condemned abusing in others and forbade it.

You reinforced the scolding with threats, and now that applied to me too. Terrible to me, for example, was this: “I’ll tear you apart like a fish,” although I knew, after all, that nothing worse followed it (as a small child, however, I did not know that), but it almost corresponded to my notions of Your power, that You would have been capable of that too. Terrible it was also when, screaming, You ran around the table in order to seize one, evidently did not want to seize one at all, but nevertheless acted so, and Mother finally seemingly rescued one. Once again, so it seemed to the child, one had kept one’s life through Your grace and carried it on as Your undeserved gift. Here too belong the threats concerning the consequences of disobedience. If I began to do something that did not please You, and You threatened me with failure, then the awe before Your opinion was so great that with that the failure, even if perhaps only for a later time, was unavoidable. I lost confidence in my own doing. I was inconstant, doubtful. The older I became, the greater was the material that You could hold up against me as proof of my worthlessness; gradually, in a certain respect, You really became right. Again I am careful not to assert that I became so only through You; You only strengthened what was there, but You strengthened it very much, because precisely in relation to me You were very powerful and used all that power for it.

A special trust You had in education by irony, it also corresponded best to Your superiority over me. An admonition with You usually had this form: “Can’t You do it this way and that? That is probably already too much for You? For that You naturally have no time?” and the like. And with it every such question accompanied by evil laughter and an evil face. One was in a certain sense already punished before one even knew that one had done something bad. Exasperating too were those corrections where one was treated as a third person, thus not even judged worthy of being addressed evilly; where You would therefore, for instance, formally speak to Mother, but actually to me, who was sitting there, for example: “One naturally cannot expect that of Mr. Son” and suchlike. (This then had its counterplay in the fact that I, for example, did not dare and later out of habit no longer even thought of asking You directly, when Mother was there. It was much less dangerous for the child to ask Mother, sitting beside You, about You, one then asked Mother: “How is Father?” and thus secured oneself against surprises.) There were of course also cases where one was very much in agreement with the worst irony, namely when it concerned someone else, for example Elli, with whom I was angry for years. It was for me a feast of malice and Schadenfreude when of her at almost every meal it would be said, for instance: “Ten meters away from the table she has to sit, the broad wench,” and when You then, angry in Your chair, without the slightest trace of friendliness or humor, but as an embittered enemy, tried in exaggeration to imitate how, extremely repulsively for Your taste, she sat there. How often this and similar things had to repeat themselves, how little in actuality You thereby achieved. I believe it was because the expenditure of wrath and being-angry seemed to stand in no proper relation to the matter itself, one did not have the feeling that the wrath had been produced by this trifle of sitting-far-from-the-table, but that it was there from the beginning in all its magnitude and had only by chance taken just this matter as the occasion for breaking loose. Since one was convinced that an occasion would in any case be found, one did not especially pull oneself together, one also grew dull under the continual threat; that one was not beaten, of that, after all, one gradually became almost certain. One became a morose, inattentive, disobedient child, always intent on an escape, usually an inner one. Thus You suffered, thus we suffered. From Your standpoint You were quite right when, with clenched teeth and the gurgling laughter which had for the first time conveyed hellish conceptions to the child, You used bitterly to say (as only quite recently because of a Constantinople letter): “That is a company!

Quite incompatible with this position toward Your children it seemed to be, when You, as indeed happened very often, publicly complained. I confess that as a child (later perhaps) I had no feeling at all for this and did not understand how You could expect to find sympathy at all. You were so gigantic in every respect; what could our pity matter to You, or even our help? That You really had to despise, as You so often despised us ourselves. I therefore did not believe the complaints and sought some secret intention behind them. Only later did I understand that You really suffered very much through the children, but then, when the complaints under other circumstances might still have encountered a childish, open, unhesitating disposition ready for any help, they had to be for me again only all too clear means of education and humiliation, as such in themselves not very strong, but with the harmful side effect that the child became accustomed not to take very seriously precisely things which it should have taken seriously.

Fortunately, however, there were also exceptions to this, mostly when You suffered silently and love and goodness with their power overcame everything opposed to them and took hold immediately. Rare as that was, it was wonderful. For instance when formerly in hot summers at noon after the meal I saw You in the shop, tired, sleeping a little, Your elbow on the desk, or when on Sundays You came to us in the summer resort, worn out; or when during a serious illness of Mother’s You, trembling from weeping, held Yourself fast to the bookcase; or when during my last illness You came softly to me in Ottla’s room, remained on the threshold, only stretched out Your neck in order to see me in bed, and out of consideration greeted me only with Your hand. At such times one lay down and wept for happiness and weeps now again, while writing it.

You also have a particularly beautiful, very seldom to be seen kind of quiet, contented, approving smile, which can make the person for whom it is meant quite happy. I cannot remember that in my childhood it was expressly bestowed on me, but it may well have happened, for why should You have denied it to me then, when I still seemed innocent to You and was Your great hope. Besides, even such friendly impressions in the long run achieved nothing other than increasing my consciousness of guilt and making the world still more incomprehensible to me.

I preferred to keep to the factual and the continual. In order, in relation to You, to hold my own even a little, partly also out of a kind of revenge, I soon began to observe, to collect, to exaggerate little ridiculous things that I noticed in You. How, for example, You were easily dazzled by persons usually only apparently of higher standing and could go on telling about it, say about some Imperial Councillor or the like (on the other hand something of that sort also pained me, that You, my father, believed You had need of such worthless confirmations of Your value and made Yourself important with them). Or I observed Your preference for indecent turns of phrase, brought out as loudly as possible, at which You laughed as though You had said something particularly excellent, whereas it was after all only a flat, little indecency (at the same time, however, it was also again an expression of Your vitality that put me to shame). Of such various observations there were naturally a great many; I was happy about them, there was occasion for whispering and fun for me, You sometimes noticed it, were annoyed by it, took it for malice, lack of respect, but believe me, for me it was nothing other than, moreover an ineffectual, means of self-preservation, they were jokes such as are spread about gods and kings, jokes that not only can be combined with the deepest respect, but even belong to it.

You, too, incidentally, corresponding to your similar position toward me, attempted a kind of counter-resistance. You used to point out how exaggeratedly well things went for me and how well I had actually been treated. That is right, but I do not believe that, under the circumstances once present, it essentially benefited me.

It is true that Mother was boundlessly good to me, but all that stood, for me, in relation to you, thus in no good relation. Mother had unconsciously the role of a beater in the hunt. If your upbringing, in some improbable case, could after all have set me on my own feet by producing defiance, aversion, or even hatred, then Mother made up for that again through goodness, through reasonable speech (in the confusion of childhood she was the primal image of reason), through intercession, and I was driven back again into your circle, out of which otherwise perhaps, to your advantage and mine, I would have broken. Or it was so that no actual reconciliation came about, that Mother merely protected me from you in secret, in secret gave me something, permitted me something, then I was again before you the light-shy creature, the deceiver, the one conscious of guilt, who because of his nullity could come even to what he held to be his right only by stealthy paths. Naturally I then grew accustomed, on these paths, to seek also that to which, even in my own opinion, I had no right. That was again an enlargement of the consciousness of guilt.

It is also true that You hardly ever really beat me. But the shouting, the reddening of Your face, the hurried undoing of the suspenders, their lying ready over the back of the chair, was for me almost worse. It is as when someone is to be hanged. If he is really hanged, then he is dead and everything is over. But if he has to live through all the preparations for being hanged and only when the noose is hanging before his face learns of his pardon, then he may have to suffer from it all his life long. Besides, out of these many times when, according to Your clearly shown opinion, I would have deserved a thrashing, but through Your grace had still just barely escaped it, there gathered again only a great consciousness of guilt. From all sides I came into Your debt.

From the beginning You reproached me (and indeed me alone or before others, for the humiliating thing about the latter You had no feeling, the affairs of Your children were always public) with the fact that thanks to Your work I lived without any privations, in quiet, warmth, abundance. I am thinking here of remarks which must literally have drawn furrows in my brain, such as: “Already at seven I had to drive the handcart through the villages.” “We all had to sleep in one room.” “We were happy when we had potatoes.” “For years, because of insufficient winter clothing, I had open sores on my legs.” “As a little boy I already had to go to Pisek into the business.” “From home I got nothing at all, not even when I was in the army, I still sent money home.” “But nevertheless, nevertheless—the father was always the father to me. Who knows that today! What do the children know! No one has suffered that! Does a child understand that today?” Under other circumstances such stories could have been an excellent means of education, they could have encouraged and strengthened one to endure the same plagues and privations which the father had gone through. But that was not what You wanted at all, the situation had indeed, precisely through the result of Your effort, become a different one, there was no opportunity to distinguish oneself in the way You had done. Such an opportunity one would first have had to create by force and upheaval, one would have had to break out of home (provided that one had had the power of decision and the strength for it and that Mother for her part had not worked against it by other means). But all that You did not want at all, that You called ingratitude, extravagance, disobedience, betrayal, madness. While therefore from one side by example, story, and shaming You lured toward it, from the other side You forbade it with the utmost severity. Otherwise, for instance, apart from the incidental circumstances, You would actually have had to be delighted by Ottla’s Zürau adventure. She wanted to go to the country, from which You had come, she wanted work and privations, as You had had them, she did not want to enjoy the successes of Your work, just as You too were independent of Your father. Were those such terrible intentions? So far from Your example and Your teaching? Good, Ottla’s intentions in the end miscarried in the result, perhaps became somewhat ridiculous, were carried out with too much noise, she did not show enough consideration for her parents. But was that exclusively her fault, not also the fault of the circumstances and above all of the fact that You were so estranged from her? Was she perhaps (as You later wanted to persuade Yourself) less estranged from You in the business than afterward in Zürau? And would You not quite certainly have had the power (provided that You could have overcome Yourself for it), through encouragement, advice, and supervision, perhaps even only through toleration, to make something very good out of this adventure?

Following on such experiences you used, in bitter jest, to say that things were going too well for us. But this jest is in a certain sense none. What you had to fight for, we received from your hand, but the struggle for outward life, which was accessible to you at once and which of course is not spared us either, that we must fight for only late, with the strength of children in manhood. I do not say that our situation is therefore absolutely less favorable than yours was, it is rather probably equal to it – (whereby, to be sure, the basic dispositions are not compared), only in this are we at a disadvantage, that with our distress we cannot boast and cannot humiliate anyone with it, as you did with your distress. I also do not deny that it would have been possible that I might really properly have enjoyed, made use of, and with them, to your joy, have continued to work on the fruits of your great and successful labor, but our estrangement stood precisely in the way of that. I could enjoy what you gave, but only in shame, weariness, weakness, consciousness of guilt. Therefore I could be grateful to you for everything only in beggar-fashion, not through the deed.

The next outward result of this whole upbringing was that I fled everything that reminded me of You even from afar. First the business. In and of itself, especially in childhood, so long as it was a shop in the street, it would have had to give me great pleasure, it was so lively, lit up in the evenings, one saw, one heard a great deal, could help here and there, distinguish oneself, above all however admire You in Your magnificent commercial talents, the way You sold, dealt with people, made jokes, were tireless, in doubtful cases knew the decision at once, and so on; even the way You wrapped something up or opened a crate was a spectacle worth seeing, and the whole, all in all, certainly not the worst school for a child. But since You gradually frightened me from all sides, and the business and You coincided for me, the business too was no longer pleasant to me. Things that there at first had been self-evident to me tormented me, shamed me, especially Your treatment of the staff. I do not know, perhaps it was like that in most businesses (in the Assecurazioni Generali, for example, in my time it was really similar, I explained my resignation there to the director, not quite truthfully, but also not quite falsely, by saying that I could not bear the abuse, which incidentally had not directly affected me at all; in this I was already too painfully sensitive from home), but the other businesses did not concern me in childhood. You, however, I heard and saw in the business shouting, scolding and raging, in a way that, according to my opinion then, did not occur again in the whole world. And not only scolding, other tyranny too. How, for example, You threw goods that You did not want confused with others down from the desk with one jerk — only the mindlessness of Your anger excused You a little — and the clerk had to pick them up. Or Your constant phrase with regard to a consumptive clerk: “He should croak, the sick dog.” You called the employees “paid enemies,” and they were that too, but even before they had become it, You seemed to me to be their “paying enemy.” There too I received the great lesson that You could be unjust; in myself I would not have noticed it so soon, for there too much feeling of guilt had accumulated, which gave You right; but there, according to my childish opinion, later of course a little, but not too greatly corrected, were strangers, who nevertheless worked for us and for that had to live in constant fear of You. Of course I exaggerated there, and indeed because I assumed without further ado that You had the same terrible effect on people as on me. If that had been so, they really could not have lived; but since they were grown people, with mostly excellent nerves, they shook off the scolding without effort, and in the end it harmed You much more than them. But to me it made the business unbearable, it reminded me all too much of my relation to You: You were, quite apart from the entrepreneur’s interest and apart from Your lust for domination, already as a businessman so superior to all who had ever learned under You that none of their achievements could satisfy You, similarly eternally unsatisfied You had to be with me also. Therefore I necessarily belonged to the party of the staff, incidentally also because already out of anxiety I did not understand how one could abuse a stranger so, and therefore out of anxiety wanted somehow to reconcile the, in my opinion, terribly aroused staff with You, with our family, if only for my own safety. Ordinary, decent behavior toward the staff was no longer enough for that, not even modest behavior was enough any longer, rather I had to be humble, not only greet first, but if possible even ward off the return greeting. And if I, the insignificant person, had licked their feet downstairs, it would still have been no compensation for the way You, the master, hacked away at them upstairs. This relation, into which I entered here with fellow human beings, had its effect beyond the business and on into the future (something similar, but not so dangerous and profound as with me, is for example also Ottla’s preference for association with poor people, the sitting together with servant girls and the like that so annoys You). In the end I was almost afraid of the business, and in any case it had long since ceased to be my affair before I even entered the Gymnasium and thereby was led still farther away from it. It also seemed to me quite unattainable for my abilities, since, as You said, it consumed even Yours. You then sought (for me today this is touching and shameful) from my aversion to the business, to Your work, which nevertheless hurt You very deeply, still to draw a little sweetness for Yourself, by maintaining that I lacked business sense, that I had higher ideas in my head and the like. Mother was of course glad at this explanation, which You forced from Yourself, and I too, in my vanity and distress, let myself be influenced by it. But if it had really been only or chiefly the “higher ideas” that drew me away from the business (which I now, but only now, honestly and actually hate), they would have had to express themselves otherwise than by letting me swim calmly and anxiously through the Gymnasium and through the study of law, until I finally landed at the official’s desk.

If I wanted to flee from You, I had also to flee from the family, even from Mother. One could indeed always find protection with her, but only in relation to You. She loved You too much and was too faithfully devoted to You for her, in the child’s struggle, to have been able to be an independent spiritual power for any length of time. A correct instinct of the child’s, by the way, for with the years Mother became ever more closely bound to You; while she always, so far as she herself was concerned, preserved her independence within the smallest limits, beautifully and delicately and without ever essentially offending You, still with the years she took over ever more completely, more in feeling than in understanding, Your judgments and condemnations with regard to the children blindly, especially in the admittedly difficult case of Ottla. Of course one must always keep in mind how tormenting and to the very end wearing down Mother’s position in the family was. She drudged in the business, in the household, suffered twice over with all the family’s illnesses, but the crowning point of all this was what she suffered in her position between us and You. You were always loving and considerate toward her, but in this respect You spared her quite exactly as little as we spared her. Ruthlessly we hammered away at her, You from Your side, we from ours. It was a diversion, one thought of nothing evil, one thought only of the struggle that You were carrying on with us, that we were carrying on with You, and on Mother we spent our fury. It was also no good contribution to the upbringing of the children, the way You — without any guilt on Your part, naturally — tormented her on our account. It even seemingly justified our otherwise unjustifiable behavior toward her. What she suffered from us because of You and from You because of us, quite apart from those cases where You were right, because she spoiled us, even if even this “spoiling” may sometimes have been only a silent, unconscious counter-demonstration against Your system. Naturally Mother could not have endured all this if she had not taken the strength to endure it from her love for us all and from the happiness of this love.

The sisters went with me only in part. Happiest in her position toward You was Valli. Standing closest to Mother, she submitted to You in a similar way too, without much effort and damage. But You too took her, precisely in remembrance of Mother, more kindly, although there was little Kafka material in her. But perhaps just that was right for You; where there was nothing Kafka-like, even You could demand nothing of that sort; You also did not have, as with the rest of us, the feeling that here something was being lost which would have to be saved by force. Besides, You may never have particularly loved what was Kafka-like, insofar as it expressed itself in women. Valli’s relation to You would perhaps even have become still more friendly if we others had not disturbed it a little.

Elli is the only example of the almost complete success of a breaking-through out of Your circle. From her, in her childhood, I would have expected it least of all. She was, after all, such a clumsy, tired, fearful, sullen, guilt-conscious, over-humble, malicious, lazy, nibbling, miserly child, I could hardly look at her, not speak to her at all, so much did she remind me of myself, so similarly did she stand under the same spell of upbringing. Especially her miserliness was hateful to me, since I had it, if possible, still more strongly. Miserliness is indeed one of the most reliable signs of deep unhappiness; I was so uncertain of all things that I actually possessed only what I already held in my hands or in my mouth or what was at least on the way there, and precisely that she, who was in a similar situation, most liked to take away from me. But all that changed when, in young years — this is the most important thing — she went away from home, married, had children, she became cheerful, unconcerned, courageous, generous, unselfish, hopeful. Almost unbelievable it is how You really did not notice this change at all and in any case did not value it according to its deserts, so blinded are You by the resentment which You have always had against Elli and at bottom have unchanged, only that this resentment has now become much less immediate, since Elli no longer lives with us and besides Your love for Felix and Your affection for Karl have made it less important. Only Gerti must sometimes still pay for it.

Of Ottla I scarcely dare to write — I know, I am thereby putting at stake the whole hoped-for effect of the letter. Under ordinary circumstances, that is, when she does not perhaps come into some special need or danger, you have for her only hatred; you have yourself admitted to me, after all, that in your opinion she intentionally keeps on causing you suffering and vexation, and while you suffer on her account, she is satisfied and rejoices. Thus a kind of devil. What a monstrous estrangement, still greater than between you and me, must have arisen between you and her, for such a monstrous misrecognition to be possible. She is so far from you that you scarcely see her any more, but set a specter in the place where you suppose her to be. I admit that you had it especially difficult with her. I do not, after all, see through the very complicated case entirely, but in any event there was here something like a kind of Löwy, equipped with the best Kafka weapons. Between us it was not an actual struggle; I was soon disposed of; what remained was flight, bitterness, sorrow, inner struggle. You two, however, were always in fighting position, always fresh, always in possession of your strength. A sight as magnificent as it was comfortless. First of all you were certainly very close to one another, for even today, of the four of us, Ottla is perhaps the purest representation of the marriage between you and Mother and of the forces that were joined there. I do not know what deprived you of the happiness of concord between father and child, it only lies near to me to believe that the development was similar to mine. On your side the tyranny of your nature, on her side Löwy defiance, sensitivity, sense of justice, unrest, and all that supported by the consciousness of Kafka strength. I too have probably influenced her, but hardly from any impulse of my own, rather through the mere fact of my existence. Besides, she came, as the last, into already completed relations of power, and could form her own judgment out of the much material lying ready to hand. I can even imagine that in her nature for a time she wavered as to whether she should throw herself on your breast or on that of the opponents, evidently at that time you missed something and thrust her back, yet you would, if it had only been possible, have become a splendid pair in concord. Through that I should indeed have lost an ally, but the sight of you both would have richly compensated me, and you too, through the immeasurable happiness of finding full satisfaction in at least one child, would have been changed very much to my advantage. All that, however, is today only a dream. Ottla has no connection with the father, must seek her way alone, as I do, and by that greater measure of confidence, self-confidence, health, lack of hesitation, which she has in comparison with me, she is in your eyes more evil and more treacherous than I am. I understand that; seen from your side she cannot be otherwise. Yes, she herself is capable of looking at herself with your eyes, of feeling your suffering with you and over it — not of being desperate, desperation is my affair — but of being very sad. You do, it is true, see us, in apparent contradiction to this, often together, we whisper, laugh, here and there you hear yourself mentioned. You have the impression of insolent conspirators. Strange conspirators. You are indeed a chief theme of our conversations as of our thinking from time immemorial, but truly not in order to think out something against you do we sit together, but in order, with every exertion, with jest, with seriousness, with love, defiance, anger, aversion, resignation, consciousness of guilt, with all the powers of head and heart, to talk through together this terrible proceeding that is pending between us and you, in all its details, from all sides, on every occasion, from far and near, this proceeding in which you keep on claiming to be judge, while you, at least for the greatest part (here I leave the door open to all errors, which of course may befall me), are just as weak and blinded a party as we are.

An example, instructive in the context of the whole, of your educational effect was Irma. On the one hand she was after all a stranger, came already grown up into your business, had to do with you chiefly as her chief, was therefore only in part and at an already resistant age exposed to your influence; on the other hand, however, she was after all also a blood-relation, revered in you her father’s brother, and you had over her much more than the mere power of a chief. And nevertheless she, who in her weak body was so capable, clever, industrious, modest, trustworthy, unselfish, faithful, who loved you as uncle and admired you as chief, who in other positions before and afterward proved herself, was for you no very good employee. She was simply, naturally also pushed there by us, in relation to you near the position of the children, and so great still in relation to her was the bending power of your nature, that in her (to be sure only in relation to you and, I hope, without the deeper suffering of the child) forgetfulness, negligence, gallows-humor, perhaps even a little defiance, so far as she was capable of it at all, developed, whereby I do not at all take into account that she was sickly, also otherwise was not very happy, and that a comfortless domesticity weighed upon her. What was for me so rich in connection in your relation to her you summed up in a sentence that has become classic for us, almost blasphemous, but precisely for the innocence in your treatment of people very evidential: The blessed departed has left me a great deal of swinish mess.

I could describe still further circles of Your influence and of the struggle against it, but here I should already come into uncertainty and would have to construct, besides, after all, the farther You remove Yourself from business and family, the friendlier, more yielding, more polite, more considerate, more sympathetic You have always become (I mean outwardly too), just as, for example, an autocrat too, once he is outside the borders of his country, has no reason still to be tyrannical, and can good-naturedly have dealings even with the lowest people. In fact, for example, in the group photographs from Franzensbad You always stood so large and cheerful among the small morose people, like a king on his travels. The children could, admittedly, have had their advantage from that too, only they would already, which was impossible, in childhood have had to be capable of recognizing it, and I, for example, would not have been allowed always, so to speak, to live in the innermost, strictest, constricting ring of Your influence, as indeed I really did.

Through that I did not lose only the sense of family, as you say, on the contrary, I rather still had a sense for the family, though chiefly negative, for the (of course never to be completed) inner severance from you. But the relations with people outside the family suffered, through your influence, if possible still more. You are entirely mistaken if you believe that for other people I do everything out of love and loyalty, for you and the family nothing out of coldness and betrayal. I repeat for the tenth time: I would probably in any case have become a person shy of people, anxious, but from there there is still a long, dark road to where I have really come. (So far in this letter I have intentionally kept comparatively little silent, but now and later I shall have to keep silent about some things which — before you and before myself — it is still too hard for me to admit. I say this so that, if the total picture here and there should become somewhat indistinct, you will not believe that lack of proofs is to blame for it, rather there are proofs there which could make the picture unbearably glaring. It is not easy to find a middle course in this.) Here, however, it is enough to recall earlier things: Before you I had lost self-confidence, and in exchange had taken on a boundless consciousness of guilt. (In memory of this boundlessness I once wrote rightly of someone: “He fears that the shame will outlive him.”) I could not suddenly transform myself when I came together with other people, rather I came, in relation to them, into an even deeper consciousness of guilt, for I had, as I already said, to make good to them what you, with my co-responsibility, had been guilty of toward them in the business. Besides, against everyone with whom I associated you had, openly or in secret, something to object, and for that too I had to beg his pardon. The mistrust which in the business and in the family you sought to teach me toward most people (name me one person in childhood in any way important to me whom you had not at least once criticized down to the very bottom) and which, strangely enough, did not burden you especially at all (you were simply strong enough to bear it, besides in reality it was perhaps only an emblem of the ruler) — this mistrust, which to me as a little one was nowhere confirmed for my own eyes, since everywhere I saw only unattainably excellent people, became in me mistrust of myself and continual fear of everything else. There, then, in general, I certainly could not save myself from you. That you deceived yourself about this was perhaps due to the fact that you actually learned nothing at all of my intercourse with people, and, mistrustful and jealous (do I deny, then, that you love me?), assumed that I must be compensating myself elsewhere for the loss of family life, since it would surely be impossible that outside I lived in the same way. Besides, in this respect, precisely in my childhood, I still had a certain consolation just in mistrust of my judgment; I said to myself: “You are exaggerating after all, feel, as youth always does, trifles too much as great exceptions.” But later, with increasing view of the world, I almost lost this consolation.

Just as little rescue from You did I find in Judaism. Here, in itself, rescue would indeed have been conceivable, but still more, it would have been conceivable that we both might have found each other in Judaism or that we might even have gone forth from there in agreement. But what sort of Judaism was that which I received from You! In the course of the years I placed myself toward it in roughly three ways.

As a child I reproached myself, in agreement with You, because I did not go sufficiently to the temple, did not fast, and so on. I believed that by this I was doing an injustice not to myself, but to You, and consciousness of guilt, which indeed was always ready, ran through me.

Later, as a young man, I did not understand how, with the nothing of Judaism over which You disposed, You could reproach me because I did not, if only out of piety, as You expressed it, exert myself to perform a similar nothing. It was indeed really, so far as I could see, a nothing, a joke, not even a joke. You went to the temple four days in the year, were there at least closer to those who were indifferent than to those who took it seriously, patiently got through the prayers as a formality, sometimes astonished me by being able to show me in the prayer book the place which was just being recited, for the rest I was allowed, if only I was, and that was the main thing, in the temple, to loiter about wherever I wanted. I therefore yawned and drowsed my way through the many hours there, so bored, I believe, as later I was only in the dancing lesson, and tried as much as possible to enjoy the few small diversions there were there, for instance when the Ark of the Covenant was opened, which always reminded me of shooting galleries, where too, when one hit a black spot, a little box-door opened, except that there something interesting always came out, and here only again and again the old dolls without heads. Besides, I also had much fear there, not only, as goes without saying, of the many people with whom one came into closer contact, but also because You once mentioned in passing that I too might be called up to the Torah. At that I trembled for years. Otherwise, however, I was not essentially disturbed in my boredom, at most by the Bar Mitzvah, which however demanded only ridiculous learning by heart, and so led only to a ridiculous examination performance, and then, as far as You are concerned, by small, not very significant incidents, for instance when You were called up to the Torah and, for my feeling, got through this exclusively social event well, or when at the memorial service for the dead You remained in the temple and I was sent away, which for a long time, evidently because of the being sent away and for lack of any deeper participation, called forth in me the feeling, hardly becoming conscious, that what was involved here was something indecent. – So it was in the temple, at home it was if possible still poorer and was limited to the first Seder evening, which more and more became a comedy with fits of laughter, admittedly under the influence of the children as they grew bigger. (Why did You have to submit to this influence? Because You had called it forth.) That then was the material of faith that was handed down to me, to this there was added at most the outstretched hand which pointed to “the sons of the millionaire Fuchs,” who on high holy days were in the temple with their father. How one could do anything better with this material than get rid of it as quickly as possible, I did not understand; precisely this getting rid of it seemed to me the most pious action.

Still later, however, I did see it differently again and understood why You were entitled to believe that in this respect too I was maliciously betraying You. You really had still brought some Judaism with You out of the little ghetto-like village community, it was not much and lost itself a little more in the city and in the army, nevertheless the impressions and memories of youth still barely sufficed for a kind of Jewish life, especially since You did not, after all, need much help of that kind, but were of a very vigorous stock and, as far as Your own person was concerned, could hardly be shaken by religious scruples, unless they were very much mixed with social scruples. At bottom the faith guiding Your life consisted in this, that You believed in the unconditional correctness of the opinions of a particular Jewish social class and actually therefore, since these opinions belonged to Your nature, believed in Yourself. In this too there still lay enough Judaism, but for being handed on further it was, as against the child, too little, it dripped away entirely while You were handing it on. In part these were untransmittable impressions of youth, in part Your feared nature. It was also impossible to make comprehensible to a child observing over-sharply out of sheer anxiety that the few nullities which You performed in the name of Judaism with an indifference corresponding to their nullity could have a higher meaning. For You they had meaning as little mementos from earlier times, and therefore You wanted to communicate them to me, but, since even for You they no longer had any intrinsic value, You could do this only by persuasion or threat; this could on the one hand not succeed and on the other hand had to make You, since You did not recognize at all Your weak position here, very angry with me because of my apparent obstinacy.

The whole thing is, after all, no isolated phenomenon; it was similar with a large part of this Jewish transitional generation, which emigrated from the countryside, still relatively devout, into the cities; that followed of itself, only it added, precisely, to our relationship, which indeed had no lack of sharpnesses, one more that was painful enough. On the other hand, in this point too, just as I do, you should indeed believe in your guiltlessness, but explain this guiltlessness by your nature and by the conditions of the time, not merely by the external circumstances, not therefore say, for instance, that you had had too much other work and worry to be able to occupy yourself with such things as well. In this way you are accustomed to turn your undoubted guiltlessness into an unjust reproach against others. That is then everywhere, and here too, very easy to refute. It would not, after all, have been a matter of some instruction or other that you ought to have given your children, but of an exemplary life; had your Judaism been stronger, your example too would have been more compelling, that is of course self-evident and again no reproach at all, but only a defense against your reproaches. You recently read Franklin’s recollections of his youth. I really did give them to you to read quite deliberately, but not, as you remarked ironically, because of a little passage about vegetarianism, but because of the relation between the author and his father, as it is described there, and of the relation between the author and his son, as it expresses itself of its own accord in these recollections written for the son. I do not want to emphasize details here.

A certain subsequent confirmation of this conception of Your Judaism I also got from Your behavior in the last years, when it seemed to You that I was occupying myself more with Jewish matters. Since from the outset You have an aversion to every one of my occupations and especially to the manner of my taking an interest, so You had it here too. But beyond that one might nevertheless have expected that You would make a small exception here. It was, after all, Judaism of Your Judaism that was stirring here, and with that therefore also the possibility of the establishing of new relations between us. I do not deny that these things, if You had shown interest in them, might precisely thereby have become suspect to me. It certainly does not occur to me to want to maintain that in this respect I am in any way better than You. But to the test of that it did not come at all. Through my mediation Judaism became abominable to You, Jewish writings unreadable, they “disgusted You.” That could mean that You insisted that only precisely the Judaism, as You had shown it to me in my childhood, was the only right one, beyond that there was nothing. But that You should insist on that was, after all, hardly conceivable. Then, however, the “disgust” (apart from the fact that at first it was directed not against Judaism, but against my person) could only mean that You unconsciously acknowledged the weakness of Your Judaism and of my Jewish education, wanted in no way to be reminded of it and answered all reminders with open hatred. Besides, Your negative high valuation of my new Judaism was very exaggerated; first, it did after all carry Your curse within it, and second, for its development the fundamental relation to one’s fellow men was decisive, in my case therefore fatal.

More correctly You struck, with Your aversion, my writing and what, unknown to You, was connected with it. Here I had in fact come a little way independently away from You, even if it did somewhat recall the worm which, trodden down behind by a foot, tears itself loose with its front part and drags itself to the side. To some extent I was in safety, there was a drawing of breath; the aversion which You naturally at once had also against my writing was here, exceptionally, welcome to me. My vanity, my ambition suffered, to be sure, under Your greeting of my books, which had become famous among us: “Put it on the night table!” (most of the time You were, after all, playing cards when a book came), but at bottom I nevertheless felt well about it, not only out of rebellious malice, not only out of joy over a new confirmation of my conception of our relation, but quite originally, because that formula sounded to me something like: “Now You are free!” Of course it was a deception, I was not free or, in the most favorable case, not yet free. My writing dealt with You, there I was indeed only lamenting what I could not lament at Your breast. It was an intentionally drawn-out leave-taking from You, only that, although it was forced by You, it nevertheless ran in the direction determined by me. But how little all that was! It is, indeed, worth speaking of at all only because it occurred in my life, elsewhere it would not be noticed at all, and then also because in childhood as a foreboding, later as a hope, still later often as despair, it ruled my life and dictated to me—if one will, yet again in Your form—my few small decisions.

For example, the choice of profession. Certainly, here You gave me complete freedom, in Your generous and in this sense even patient way. To be sure, in this You also followed the general treatment of sons, authoritative for You, of the Jewish middle class, or at least the value judgments of this class. Finally, one of Your misunderstandings concerning my person also played a part in this. You have namely always, from fatherly pride, from ignorance of my actual existence, from inferences drawn from my frailty, considered me especially industrious. As a child, in Your opinion, I was always studying, and later always writing. Now that is not remotely true. Rather one can say, with much less exaggeration, that I studied little and learned nothing; that something stuck in the course of the many years, with an average memory, with not the very worst power of comprehension, is after all not very remarkable, but in any case the total result in knowledge, and especially in the grounding of knowledge, is extremely wretched in comparison with the expenditure of time and money in the midst of an outwardly carefree, quiet life, especially also in comparison with almost all the people I know. It is wretched, but comprehensible to me. Since I can remember, I had such deepest anxieties about the assertion of my spiritual existence that everything else was indifferent to me. Jewish Gymnasium pupils among us are easily remarkable, one finds there the most improbable things, but my cold, scarcely veiled, indestructible, childishly helpless indifference, going to the point of the ridiculous, animalishly self-satisfied, the indifference of a child sufficient unto itself, but coldly fantastic, I have not found again anywhere else, although here it was also the only protection against the destruction of the nerves through fear and consciousness of guilt. Only the anxiety about myself occupied me, but this in the most various ways. For instance as anxiety about my health; it began lightly, here and there there arose a small apprehension about digestion, hair loss, a curvature of the spine and so on, this increased in uncountable gradations, finally it ended with a real illness. But since I was sure of no thing, needed at every moment a new confirmation of my existence, since nothing was in my actual, undoubted, sole possession, unequivocally determined only by me, in truth a disinherited son, naturally even what was nearest, my own body, became uncertain to me; I shot up tall, but knew nothing to do with it, the burden was too heavy, the back became crooked; I hardly dared to move, let alone do gymnastics, I remained weak; stared in wonder at everything over which I still had command as at a miracle, for instance my good digestion; that was enough to lose it, and with that the way to all hypochondria was free, until then, under the superhuman exertion of wanting-to-marry (of that I shall speak yet), the blood came from the lung, in which the apartment in the Schönbornpalais—which, however, I needed only because I believed I needed it for my writing, so that this too belongs on this page—may well have had enough share. Thus all this did not come from excessive work, as You always imagine it. There were years in which, in full health, I lazed away more time on the sofa than You have in Your whole life, all illnesses included. When I ran away from You as if most highly occupied, it was usually in order to lie down in my room. My total work output, both in the office (where, to be sure, laziness is not very noticeable and moreover was kept within bounds by my timidity) and at home, is tiny; if You had an overview of it, it would horrify You. Probably by disposition I am not at all lazy, but there was nothing for me to do. There, where I lived, I was rejected, judged, beaten down, and to flee elsewhere did indeed exert me to the utmost, but that was no work, for it was a matter of the impossible, which, for my powers, with small exceptions, was unattainable.

In this condition, then, I received the freedom of choosing a profession. But was I still capable at all of really making use of such a freedom? Did I still trust myself to be able to attain a real profession? My estimation of myself was much more dependent on You than on anything else, for instance on some outward success. That was the strengthening of a moment, nothing more, but on the other side Your weight always pulled down much more heavily. I would never get through the first class of elementary school, I thought, but it succeeded, I even received a prize; but the entrance examination for the Gymnasium I would certainly not pass, but it succeeded; but now in the first Gymnasium class I shall definitely fail, no, I did not fail, and it went on succeeding further and further. But from this there resulted no confidence, on the contrary, I was always convinced—and in Your repellent expression I have almost the proof of it—that the more I succeed, the worse it must finally turn out. Often I saw in my mind the dreadful assembly of the professors (the Gymnasium is only the most unified example, everywhere around me, however, it was similar), how they, when I had got through the Prima, that is, in the Sekunda, when I had got through this, that is, in the Tertia, and so on, would come together in order to investigate this unique, heaven-crying case, how it had been possible for me, the most incapable and in any case the most ignorant, to creep up into this class, which, since now general attention was directed toward me, would naturally immediately spit me out, to the jubilation of all the righteous ones freed from this nightmare. — To live with such notions is not easy for a child. What did instruction matter to me under these circumstances. Who was in a position to strike out of me a spark of participation? Instruction interested me—and not only instruction, but everything round about in this decisive age—about as much as the small current banking business interests a bank embezzler who is still in his position and trembles before discovery, which he still always has to dispatch as an official. So small, so far away was everything beside the main thing. It then went on as far as the Matura, through which I really already came in part only by swindle, and then it stuck, now I was free. If already, despite the compulsion of the Gymnasium, I had concerned myself only with myself, how much more now, when I was free. Thus there was no actual freedom of choice of profession for me, I knew: everything, as against the main thing, will be exactly as indifferent to me as all subjects of instruction in the Gymnasium, it is a matter, therefore, of finding a profession which, without injuring my vanity too much, permits me this indifference most readily. Thus law was the self-evident thing. Small contrary attempts of vanity, of senseless hope, such as a fortnight’s study of chemistry, a half-year’s study of German, only strengthened that fundamental conviction. So I studied law. That meant that in the few months before the examinations, with plentiful expenditure of nerves, I fed myself intellectually almost literally on wood-meal, which moreover had already been chewed for me beforehand by thousands of mouths. But in a certain sense this was just to my taste, as in a certain sense earlier the Gymnasium too and later the official’s profession, for all this corresponded perfectly to my situation. In any case I showed here astonishing foresight, already as a small child I had, with regard to studies and profession, enough clear premonitions. From here I expected no rescue, here I had long since renounced it.

No foresight at all, however, did I show with regard to the significance and possibility of a marriage for me; this, until now the greatest terror of my life, came upon me almost entirely unexpectedly. The child had developed so slowly, these things lay outwardly far too remote from him; here and there the necessity arose of thinking about them; that here, however, a lasting, decisive, and even the most embittered test was preparing itself, was not to be recognized. In reality, however, the attempts at marriage became the grandest and most hopeful attempt at rescue, correspondingly grand, then, to be sure, was also the failure.

I fear, because in this region everything fails me, that I shall not succeed either in making these attempts at marriage intelligible to You. And yet the success of the whole letter depends on it, for in these attempts there was gathered, on the one hand, everything I had at my disposal in the way of positive forces, on the other hand there gathered here too, positively with fury, all the negative forces which I have described as a concomitant result of Your upbringing, thus the weakness, the lack of self-confidence, the consciousness of guilt, and they drew, formally, a cordon between me and marriage. The explanation will be difficult for me also because here I have thought through and dug through everything, over so many days and nights, again and again, that even me the mere sight of it now already confuses. The explanation is made easier for me only by Your, in my opinion, complete misunderstanding of the matter; to improve a little so complete a misunderstanding does not seem excessively difficult.

To begin with, you place the failure of the marriages in the series of my other failures; against that in itself I would have nothing, provided that you accept my previous explanation of the failure. It does indeed stand in this series, only you underestimate the importance of the matter and underestimate it to such a degree that, when we speak with one another about it, we are really speaking of entirely different things. I venture to say that in your whole life nothing has happened to you which would have had for you such importance as the marriage attempts had for me. By that I do not mean that in itself you had experienced nothing so important, on the contrary, your life was much richer and more care-laden and more crowded than mine, but precisely for that reason nothing of this kind has happened to you. It is as if one man has to climb five low stair-steps and a second only one stair-step, which however, at least for him, is as high as those five together; the first will not only manage the five, but hundreds and thousands more besides, he will have led a great and very strenuous life, but none of the steps he has climbed will have had for him such importance as for the second that one, first, high step, impossible for all his powers to climb, up to which he does not get and beyond which, naturally, he also does not get.

To marry, to found a family, to accept all children that come, to maintain them in this insecure world and even to guide them a little, is, according to my conviction, the utmost that can succeed for a human being at all. That it apparently succeeds easily for so many is no counterproof, for first it actually does not succeed for many, and second these not-many for the most part do not “do” it, but it merely “happens” with them; this is admittedly not that utmost, but still very great and very honorable (especially since “doing” and “happening” cannot be cleanly separated from one another). And finally it is not even a question of this utmost, but only of some distant, but decent approximation; it is surely not necessary to fly into the middle of the sun, but still to crawl one’s way to a clean little spot on the earth, where sometimes the sun shines and one can warm oneself a little.

How then was I prepared for this? As badly as possible. That follows already from what has gone before. But insofar as there is for it a direct preparation of the individual and a direct creation of the general basic conditions, You did not outwardly interfere much. It cannot be otherwise either, here the general sexual customs of class, people, and time decide. Still You did interfere there too, not much, for the prerequisite of such interference can only be strong mutual trust, and that had been lacking to both of us already long before the decisive time, and not very happily, because our needs were after all quite different; what seizes me can scarcely touch You yet and conversely, what is innocence with You can be guilt with me and conversely, what remains without consequence with You can be my coffin lid.

I remember, once in the evening I was walking with you and Mother, it was on the Josephsplatz near the present Länderbank, and began, stupidly boastful, superior, proud, cool (that was untrue), cold (that was genuine) and stammering, as I mostly spoke with you, to talk about the interesting things, reproached you for my having been left uninstructed, for the schoolfellows’ first having had to take charge of me, for my having been near great dangers (here, in my fashion, I lied shamelessly, in order to show myself courageous, for as a consequence of my timidity I had no more precise conception of the “great dangers”), but at the end indicated that now, fortunately, I already knew everything, needed no more advice, and everything was in order. In any case I had begun to speak of it chiefly because it gave me pleasure at least to speak of it, then also out of curiosity, and finally also in order somehow to avenge myself on you for something or other. You took it, in accordance with your nature, very simply, you said only something like, you could give me a piece of advice as to how I would be able to pursue these things without danger. Perhaps I had wanted to entice just such an answer from you, for it did correspond to the lustfulness of the child overfed with meat and all good things, physically inactive, eternally occupied with himself, but nevertheless my outward shame was thereby so wounded, or I believed it must be so wounded, that against my will I could no longer speak with you about it and arrogantly, insolently broke off the conversation.

It is not easy to judge Your answer at that time. on the one hand it does have something crushingly open about it, in a certain sense something primordial, on the other hand, however, as far as the lesson itself is concerned, it is very modernly without scruple. I do not know how old I was then, certainly not much older than sixteen years. For such a boy, however, it was indeed a very strange answer, and the distance between the two of us shows itself also in this, that it was actually the first direct, life-embracing lesson that I received from You. Its real meaning, however, which even then sank into me, but came only much later half into my consciousness, was the following: That to which You advised me was, after all, in Your opinion and all the more in my opinion at that time, the filthiest thing there was. That You wanted to see to it that physically I brought nothing of the filth home was secondary, by that You were, after all, only protecting Yourself, Your house. The main thing was rather that You remained outside Your advice, a husband, a pure man, raised above these things; this probably became still sharper for me at that time through the fact that marriage too seemed shameless to me and that it was therefore impossible for me to apply to my parents what general things I had heard about marriage. Through this You became still purer, came still higher. The thought that You, say, before marriage, could also have given Yourself a similar piece of advice, was wholly unthinkable to me. Thus there was almost no little remnant of earthly filth on You. And precisely You thrust me, as though I were destined for it, with a few open words down into this filth. If therefore the world consisted only of me and You, an idea that lay very near to me, then therefore with You this purity of the world ended, and with me, by virtue of Your advice, the filth began. In itself it was, after all, incomprehensible that You condemned me so, only old guilt and deepest contempt on Your part could explain that to

Here perhaps our mutual guiltlessness also becomes clearest. A gives B a frank piece of advice, corresponding to his conception of life, not very beautiful, but nevertheless even today in the city quite usual, perhaps preventing injuries to health. This advice is for B morally not very strengthening, but why should he not in the course of the years be able to work his way out of the harm, besides he need not follow the advice at all, and in any case in the advice alone there lies no occasion for, say, B’s whole future world to collapse over him. And yet something of this kind happens, but precisely only because A is You and B is I.

This mutual guiltlessness I can survey particularly well also because a similar collision between us, under quite different circumstances, occurred again some twenty years later, as a fact horrible, in and of itself however much less harmful, for where was there then in me, a thirty-six-year-old, anything that could still be harmed. By this I mean a little discussion on one of the few agitated days after the announcement of my last intention to marry. You said to me something like: “She has probably put on some choice blouse, as the Prague Jewesses understand how to do, and on the strength of that you have of course resolved to marry her. And indeed as quickly as possible, in a week, tomorrow, today. I do not understand you, you are after all a grown man, you are in the city, and know no other counsel for yourself than at once to marry some random woman. Are there no other possibilities there? If you are afraid of that, I myself will go there with you.” You spoke more fully and more clearly, but I can no longer remember the details, perhaps it also became a little misty before my eyes, almost I was more interested in Mother, how she, though completely in agreement with You, nevertheless took something from the table and with it went out of the room.

More deeply You have scarcely ever humiliated me with words, and more plainly never shown me Your contempt. When, twenty years ago, You had spoken to me in a similar way, one could, with Your eyes, even have seen in it some respect for the precocious city boy who, in Your opinion, could already, so without detours, be introduced into life. Today this consideration could only increase the contempt, for the boy who then made a start has remained stuck in him and seems to You today richer by no experience, but only by twenty years more pitiful. My decision for a girl meant nothing at all to You. You had always (unconsciously) held down my power of decision and now believed (unconsciously) You knew what it was worth. Of my attempts at rescue in other directions You knew nothing, therefore You could also know nothing of the trains of thought that had led me to this attempt at marriage, had to try to guess them and guessed, in accordance with the general judgment that You had of me, at the most abominable, clumsiest, most ridiculous thing. And did not hesitate for a moment to say this to me in just such a way. The shame that You thereby inflicted on me was nothing to You in comparison with the shame that, in Your opinion, I would do to Your name through the marriage.

Now, with regard to my attempts at marriage, You can indeed answer me many things and have done so too: You could not have much respect for my decision, if I dissolved the engagement with F. twice and twice took it up again, if I dragged you and Mother uselessly to the engagement in Berlin, and the like. All that is true, but how did it come about?

The basic idea of both attempts at marriage was quite correct: to found a household, to become independent. An idea which is, after all, sympathetic to you, only that in reality it then turns out as in the children’s game where one holds the other’s hand and even presses it and at the same time cries: “Oh do go, do go, why don’t you go?” Which in our case, to be sure, has been complicated by the fact that you have always honestly meant the “do go!” since you have likewise always, without knowing it, merely by the force of your nature, held me or, more correctly, held me down.

Both girls were indeed chosen by chance, but extraordinarily well chosen. Again a sign of your complete misunderstanding, that you can believe that I, the anxious, hesitating, suspicious one, decide on a marriage with one sudden jerk, perhaps out of delight over a blouse. Both marriages would rather have become marriages of reason, insofar as by that it is said that day and night, the first time for years, the second time for months, all my power of thought was applied to the plan.

Neither of the girls disappointed me, only I disappointed them both. My judgment of them today is exactly the same as it was then, when I wanted to marry them.

Nor is it the case that in the second attempt at marriage I had disregarded the experiences of the first attempt, and thus had been reckless. The cases were simply quite different, precisely the earlier experiences could give me hope in the second case, which altogether was much more promising. Of details I do not want to speak here.

Why then have I not married? There were individual obstacles as everywhere, but in taking such obstacles life, after all, consists. The essential obstacle, unfortunately independent of the individual case, however, was that I am evidently mentally incapable of marrying. This expresses itself in the fact that from the moment in which I decide to marry, I can no longer sleep, my head glows by day and night, it is no life any more, I sway about desperately. These are not really worries that cause this, to be sure, in accordance with my heaviness of blood and pedantry, countless worries run along with it too, but they are not the decisive thing, they do indeed, like worms, complete the work on the corpse, but I am decisively struck by something else. It is the general pressure of fear, of weakness, of self-contempt.

I will try to explain it more closely: Here, in the attempt at marriage, in my relations to You, two things apparently opposed meet as strongly as nowhere else. Marriage is certainly the pledge of the sharpest self-liberation and independence. I would have a family, the highest thing one can, in my opinion, attain, therefore also the highest thing that You have attained, I would be Your equal, all old and eternally new shame and tyranny would be merely history. That would indeed be fairy-tale-like, but in that already lies what is questionable. It is too much, so much cannot be attained. It is as if someone were imprisoned and he had not only the intention of escaping, which perhaps would be attainable, but also, and indeed at the same time, the intention of rebuilding the prison into a pleasure-palace for himself. But if he escapes, he cannot rebuild, and if he rebuilds, he cannot escape. If I, in the particular relation of misfortune in which I stand to You, want to become independent, I must do something that as far as possible has no relation at all to You—marrying is indeed the greatest thing and gives the most honorable independence, but it is also at the same time in the closest relation to You. To want to get out here therefore has something of madness about it, and every attempt is almost punished with it.

Precisely this close relation, after all, also partly lures me toward marrying. I imagine this equality, which would then come into being between us and which You could understand as You could no other, as so beautiful precisely because I could then be a free, grateful, guiltless, upright son, You an unoppressed, untyrannical, sympathetic, satisfied father. But for that purpose everything that has happened would have to be made unhappened, that is to say we ourselves would have to be struck out.

As we are, however, marriage is closed to me by the fact that it is precisely Your very own domain. Sometimes I imagine the map of the earth spread out and You stretched across it diagonally. And then it seems to me as though for my life only those regions came into consideration which You either do not cover or which do not lie within Your reach. And these, in accordance with the conception I have of Your size, are not many and not very consoling regions, and marriage especially is not among them.

This very comparison proves that I by no means want to say You had driven me out of marriage by Your example, perhaps in the way You drove me out of the business. On the contrary, despite all remote similarity. In your marriage I had before me a marriage in many respects exemplary, exemplary in fidelity, mutual help, number of children, and even when the children then grew up and more and more disturbed the peace, the marriage as such remained untouched by it. Perhaps precisely from this example my high conception of marriage was formed; that the desire for marriage was powerless had, indeed, other reasons. They lay in Your relation to the children, of which, after all, the whole letter treats.

There is an opinion according to which the fear of marriage sometimes derives from the fact that one fears the children would later pay one back for what one has oneself sinned against one’s own parents. That, I believe, has no very great significance in my case, for my consciousness of guilt really comes from You and is also too much permeated by its uniqueness, indeed this feeling of uniqueness belongs to its tormenting essence, a repetition is unimaginable. Nevertheless I must say that such a mute, dull, dry, ruined son would be unbearable to me, I would probably, if there were no other possibility, flee from him, emigrate, as You only recently wanted to do because of my marriage. Thus in my incapacity for marriage I may also be influenced by that.

Much more important, however, in this, is the fear for myself. This is to be understood thus: I have already indicated that in writing and in what is connected with it I have made small attempts at independence, attempts at escape with the very smallest success, they will hardly lead further, much confirms this for me. Nevertheless it is my duty or rather my life consists in watching over them, in letting no danger that I can ward off, indeed no possibility of such a danger, come near them. Marriage is the possibility of such a danger, admittedly also the possibility of the greatest furtherance, but it is enough for me that it is the possibility of a danger. What would I then do, if it were after all a danger! How could I go on living in marriage in the perhaps unprovable, but in any case irrefutable feeling of this danger! In face of this I can indeed waver, but the final outcome is certain, I must renounce. The comparison of the sparrow in the hand and the dove on the roof fits here only very remotely. In my hand I have nothing, on the roof is everything and yet I must — so the conditions of the struggle and the necessity of life decide it — choose the Nothing. Similarly, after all, I also had to choose in the choice of a profession.

But the most important obstacle to marriage is the already ineradicable conviction that for the preservation of a family, and still more for its guidance, all that is necessarily required which I recognized in you, and indeed all of it together, good and bad, as it is organically united in you, that is, strength and mockery of the other, health and a certain lack of measure, gift of speech and inadequacy, self-confidence and dissatisfaction with everyone else, superiority to the world and tyranny, knowledge of human beings and mistrust toward most of them, then also advantages without any disadvantage, such as diligence, endurance, presence of mind, fearlessness. Of all this I had, comparatively, almost nothing or only very little, and with that I wanted to dare to marry, while I saw, after all, that even you had to struggle hard in marriage and with regard to the children even failed? This question I naturally did not put to myself expressly and do not answer expressly, otherwise ordinary thinking would indeed have taken possession of the matter and shown me other men who are different from you (to name one close at hand who is very different from you: Uncle Richard) and yet have married and at least have not collapsed under it, which is already very much and would have been amply enough for me. But I did not put this question at all, rather I experienced it from childhood on. I did not, after all, first test myself with respect to marriage, but with respect to every trifle; with respect to every trifle you convinced me, through your example and through your upbringing, just as I have tried to describe it, of my incapacity, and what was true in every trifle and proved you right, naturally had to be monstrously true before the greatest thing, that is, before marriage. Up to the attempts at marriage I grew up roughly like a businessman who, with cares and bad forebodings, but without exact bookkeeping, lives on into the day. He has a few small profits, which, because of their rarity, he continually cossets and exaggerates in his imagination, and otherwise only daily losses. Everything is entered, but never balanced. Now comes the compulsion to draw up the balance, that is, the attempt at marriage. And with the great sums with which one has to reckon here, it is as if there had never been even the smallest profit, everything one single great debt. And now marry, without going mad!

Thus ends my life with you up to now, and such prospects it carries within itself for the future.

You might, if You survey my justification of the fear I have of You, answer: “You maintain that I make it easy for myself when I explain my relation to You simply by Your fault, but I believe that, in spite of outward exertion, You make it at least no harder for Yourself, but much more profitable. First of all You too reject all guilt and responsibility from Yourself, in this, then, our procedure is the same. But while I then, as openly as I also mean it, ascribe the sole guilt to You, You want at the same time to be ‘over-clever’ and ‘over-tender’ and to absolve me too of every guilt. Naturally this latter succeeds for You only in appearance (for You want nothing more than that), and it emerges between the lines, despite all the ‘phrases’ about essence and nature and opposition and helplessness, that actually I have been the attacker, while everything You have done was only self-defense. Now, then, through Your insincerity You would already have achieved enough, for You have proved three things, first that You are innocent, second that I am guilty and third that You, out of sheer magnanimity, are ready not only to forgive me, but, what is more and less, also even to prove and to want to believe it Yourself, that I, though contrary to the truth, am also innocent. That might now already be enough for You, but it is still not enough for You. For You have taken it into Your head to want to live wholly and entirely off me. I admit that we fight with each other, but there are two kinds of fight. The chivalrous fight, where the forces of independent opponents measure themselves, each remains for himself, loses for himself, triumphs for himself. And the fight of the vermin, which not only stings, but at once also, for the preservation of its own life, sucks the blood. That is indeed the true professional soldier and that is You. You are unfit for life; in order, however, to be able to arrange Yourself comfortably, free from care and without self-reproaches in this, You prove that I have taken all Your fitness for life away from You and put it in my pockets. What does it matter to You now if You are unfit for life, I have the responsibility after all. But You stretch Yourself out quietly and let Yourself, bodily and spiritually, be dragged by me through life. An example: when You lately wanted to marry, You wanted, as You do admit in this letter, at the same time not to marry, but wanted, in order not to have to exert Yourself, that I help You not to marry, by my forbidding You this marriage because of the ‘shame’ which the union would bring upon my name. But that did not occur to me at all. First, here as elsewhere, I never wanted to be ‘an obstacle to Your happiness,’ and second, I never want to get such a reproach to hear from my child. But did the self-conquest with which I left the marriage open to You help me in any way? Not in the least. My aversion to the marriage would not have prevented it, on the contrary, it would in itself have been one incentive more for You to marry the girl, for the ‘attempt at flight,’ as You express Yourself, would by that have become complete. And my permission for the marriage did not prevent Your reproaches, for You prove indeed that in any case I am to blame for Your not marrying. But basically You have here and in everything else proved for me nothing other than that all my reproaches were justified and that among them there was still lacking one especially justified reproach, namely the reproach of insincerity, of servility, of parasitism. If I am not very much mistaken, You are parasitizing on me even with this letter as such.

To this I answer that, to begin with, this whole objection, which in part can also be turned against you, does not come from you, but precisely from me. Not even your mistrust of others is as great as my self-mistrust, to which you have brought me up. I do not deny a certain justification of the objection, which in itself also contributes something new to the characterization of our relationship. Thus of course things in reality cannot fit together as do the proofs in my letter, life is more than a game of patience; but with the correction that results from this objection, a correction that in detail I neither can nor want to carry out, in my opinion something so very close to the truth has nevertheless been achieved that it can calm us both a little and make living and dying easier.

You asked me once recently why I maintain that I have fear of you. I knew, as usual, nothing to answer you, partly precisely out of the fear that I have of you, partly because too many particulars belong to the substantiation of this fear for me to be able even halfway to hold them together in speaking. And if I try here to answer you in writing, it will nevertheless be only very incomplete, because even in writing the fear and its consequences hinder me in relation to you and because the magnitude of the material goes far beyond my memory and my understanding.

To you the matter has always presented itself as very simple, at least so far as you have spoken of it before me and, without selection, before many others. It seemed to you to be something like this: you have worked hard your whole life long, sacrificed everything for your children, above all for me, I have as a result lived “in luxury and abundance,” have had complete freedom to study what I wanted, have had no occasion for worries about sustenance, and therefore for worries at all; for this you demanded no gratitude, you know “the gratitude of children,” but still at least some sort of responsiveness, some sign of fellow-feeling; instead of that I have always hidden away from you, in my room, among books, with crazy friends, with overwrought ideas; openly I have never spoken with you, in the temple I did not come to you, in Franzensbad I never visited you, otherwise too I have never had any sense of family, I have not troubled myself about the business and your other affairs, I saddled you with the factory and then left you, I supported Ottla in her obstinacy and while for you I do not lift a finger (I do not even bring you a theater ticket), for friends I do everything. If you sum up your judgment of me, then it follows that, though you do not reproach me with anything positively indecent or evil (with the possible exception of my last intention to marry), you do reproach me with coldness, estrangement, ingratitude. And indeed you reproach me with it as if it were my fault, as if I could, say, by some turn of the steering-wheel have arranged the whole thing differently, while you have not the slightest fault in it, unless it were the fault that you have been too good to me.

This usual presentation of yours I consider correct only insofar as I too believe that you are wholly without guilt in our estrangement. But just as wholly without guilt am I too. If I could bring you to acknowledge that, then—not that a new life would be possible, for that we are both much too old, but still a kind of peace, not a ceasing, but still a mitigation of your unceasing reproaches.

Some sort of inkling of what I mean to say, strangely enough, you have. Thus, for example, you said to me a short time ago: “I have always been fond of you, even if outwardly I was not toward you as other fathers are accustomed to be, precisely because I cannot dissemble like others.” Now I have, Father, on the whole never doubted your goodness toward me, but this remark I consider incorrect. You cannot dissemble, that is correct, but to want to maintain on this ground alone that the other fathers dissemble is either mere insistence on being right, not to be discussed further, or else—and this in my opinion is what it really is—the veiled expression of the fact that between us something is not in order and that you have helped to cause it, but without guilt. If you really mean that, then we are agreed.

I do not of course say that what I am I became only through Your influence. That would be very much exaggerated (and I even incline to this exaggeration). It is very easily possible that, even if I had grown up entirely free of Your influence, I still could not have become a person after Your own heart. I would probably still have become a weakly, anxious, hesitant, restless person, neither Robert Kafka nor Karl Hermann, but still quite different from what I really am, and we could have got on excellently with one another. I would have been happy to have You as a friend, as a chief, as an uncle, as a grandfather, yes even (though already more hesitantly) as a father-in-law. Only precisely as a father You were too strong for me, especially since my brothers died small, my sisters came only long afterward, I therefore had to withstand the first shock entirely alone, for that I was far too weak.

Compare us both: I, to put it very briefly, a Löwy with a certain Kafka fund, which however is not set in motion by the Kafka will to life, business, conquest, but by a Löwy spur, which works more secretly, more shyly, in another direction, and often stops altogether. You, on the other hand, a real Kafka in strength, health, appetite, power of voice, gift of speech, self-satisfaction, superiority to the world, endurance, presence of mind, knowledge of men, a certain generosity, of course also with all the faults and weaknesses belonging to these advantages, into which your temperament and sometimes your sudden anger hound you. Not quite a whole Kafka are you perhaps in your general view of the world, so far as I can compare you with Uncle Philipp, Ludwig, Heinrich. That is strange, here too I do not see quite clearly. They were after all all more cheerful, fresher, less constrained, easier-living, less severe than you. (In that, incidentally, I have inherited much from you and have administered the inheritance much too well, without however having the necessary counterweights in my nature, as you have them.) Yet on the other hand you too in this respect have gone through various periods, were perhaps more cheerful before your children, especially I, disappointed you and oppressed you at home (when strangers came, you were different, of course) and perhaps now have again become more cheerful, since the grandchildren and the son-in-law again give you something of that warmth which the children, except perhaps Valli, could not give you. In any case we were so different and in this difference so dangerous to one another that, if one had wanted perhaps to calculate in advance how I, the slowly developing child, and you, the finished man, would behave toward one another, one might have assumed that you would simply stamp me down, that nothing of me would remain. That has not happened, the living cannot be calculated, but perhaps something worse has happened. In which connection, however, I ask you continually not to forget that I never in the remotest degree believe in any guilt on your part. You had such an effect on me as you had to have, only you must cease to consider it a special malice on my part that I have succumbed to this effect.

I was an anxious child; nevertheless I was certainly also obstinate, as children are; certainly Mother spoiled me too, but I cannot believe that I was especially hard to guide, I cannot believe that a friendly word, a quiet taking-me-by-the-hand, a kind look could not have exacted from me everything that one wanted. Now You are indeed at bottom a good and gentle man (what follows will not contradict this, I am after all speaking only of the manifestation in which You affected the child), but not every child has the endurance and fearlessness to search so long until it comes to the goodness. You can treat a child only as You Yourself are in fact made, with strength, noise, and sudden anger, and in this case that seemed to You moreover for this reason also very well suited, because You wanted to bring up in me a strong courageous boy.

Your means of education in the very first years I cannot today of course describe directly, but I can more or less picture them to myself by inference back from the later years and from Your treatment of Felix. Here it comes into consideration, as an aggravating factor, that You were then younger, therefore fresher, wilder, more original, still more unconcerned than today, and that You were besides wholly bound to the business, could hardly show Yourself to me even once in the day, and therefore made upon me an all the deeper impression, which scarcely ever flattened out into habituation.

Directly I remember only one incident from the first years. You perhaps remember it too. Once in the night I whimpered continually for water, certainly not out of thirst, but probably partly in order to annoy, partly in order to amuse myself. After several strong threats had not helped, you took me out of bed, carried me out onto the balcony and left me there alone for a little while, in my shirt, before the closed door. I do not mean to say that that was wrong, perhaps at that time the night’s rest really could not be secured in any other way, but with this I do mean to characterize your methods of upbringing and their effect on me. I was, afterwards, probably already obedient then, but I had an inner damage from it. The for me self-evident nature of the senseless begging-for-water and the extraordinarily terrible thing of being-carried-out I could, according to my nature, never bring into the right connection. Even years later I suffered under the tormenting idea that the gigantic man, my father, the final authority, could come almost without reason and carry me in the night out of bed onto the balcony, and that I was therefore such a nothing for him.

That was at that time only a small beginning, but this feeling of nullity which often dominates me (in another respect, to be sure, also a noble and fruitful feeling) derives in many ways from your influence. I would have needed a little encouragement, a little friendliness, a little keeping-open of my path, instead you blocked it for me, with the good intention, of course, that I should go another path. But for that I was not fit. You encouraged me, for example, when I saluted well and marched, but I was no future soldier, or you encouraged me when I could eat heartily or even drink beer with it, or when I could sing after songs I did not understand or parrot back to you your favorite turns of speech, but none of this belonged to my future. And it is characteristic that even today you actually encourage me in something only when you yourself are drawn into it, when it is a matter of your self-regard, which I injure (for example through my intention to marry) or which is injured in me (when for example Pepa abuses me). Then I am encouraged, reminded of my value, referred to the matches which I would be entitled to make, and Pepa is completely condemned. But apart from the fact that for encouragement at my present age I am already almost inaccessible, what help would it be to me, too, if it appears only then where in the first rank it is not a matter of me.

At that time, and at that time everywhere, I would have needed encouragement. I was, after all, already cast down by your mere physicality. I remember, for example, how we often undressed together in a cabin. I thin, weak, narrow, you strong, big, broad. Already in the cabin I seemed miserable to myself, and indeed not only before you, but before the whole world, for you were for me the measure of all things. But if we then stepped out of the cabin before the people, I at your hand, a little skeleton, unsure, barefoot on the planks, in fear of the water, incapable of imitating your swimming movements, which you, with good intention, but in fact to my deep humiliation, kept on demonstrating to me, then I was very desperate and all my bad experiences in all fields came splendidly together in such moments. I was most at ease still when you sometimes undressed first and I could remain alone in the cabin and postpone the shame of appearing in public for so long, until you finally came to look and drove me out of the cabin. I was grateful to you that you did not seem to notice my distress, also I was proud of my father’s body. Incidentally, this difference between us still exists similarly today.

Corresponding to this, further, was Your intellectual supremacy. You had worked Yourself up so high by Your own strength alone, consequently You had unlimited confidence in Your opinion. For me as a child that was not even so blinding as it was later for the growing young man. In Your armchair You ruled the world. Your opinion was right, every other was mad, overwrought, meshugge, not normal. At the same time Your self-confidence was so great that You did not have to be consistent at all and yet did not cease to be right. It could also happen that in a matter You had no opinion at all and consequently all opinions that were at all possible with regard to the matter had, without exception, to be false. You could, for example, rail against the Czechs, then against the Germans, then against the Jews, and indeed not only selectively, but in every respect, and in the end no one was left except You. For me You acquired the enigmatic quality that all tyrants have, whose right is founded on their person, not on thinking. At least it seemed so to me.

Now you did in fact, as against me, turn out astonishingly often to be right; in conversation that was self-evident, for conversation scarcely ever came about, but also in reality. Yet even that was nothing especially incomprehensible: in all my thinking I stood under your heavy pressure, even in the thinking that did not agree with yours and especially in this. All these thoughts apparently independent of you were from the beginning burdened with your dismissive judgment; to bear that until the complete and lasting carrying-out of the thought was almost impossible. I am not speaking here of any lofty thoughts, but of every little undertaking of childhood. One had only to be happy about some matter, to be filled with it, to come home and express it, and the answer was an ironic sigh, a shaking of the head, a tapping of the finger on the table: “I’ve seen something finer too” or “Tell me your troubles” or “I haven’t got such a rested head” or “Buy yourself something with it!” or “Quite an event!” Naturally one could not demand enthusiasm from you for every childish trifle, when you lived in care and trouble. That was not what it was about. It was rather a matter of this, that you always and on principle had to prepare such disappointments for the child by virtue of your contrary nature, further that this opposition, through accumulation of the material, strengthened itself unceasingly, so that finally it asserted itself also by habit, when for once you were of the same opinion as I, and that finally these disappointments of the child were not disappointments of ordinary life, but, since after all it was a question of your person, decisive for everything, struck at the core. The courage, the resolution, the confidence, the joy in this and that did not hold out to the end, when you were against it or already when your opposition could merely be assumed; and it could well be assumed in almost everything I did.

This applied to thoughts as well as to people. It was enough that I had a little interest in a person—it did not, after all, happen very often, as a consequence of my nature—for You, without any regard for my feeling and without respect for my judgment, to fall upon him with abuse, slander, degradation. Innocent, childlike people, as for example the Yiddish actor Löwy, had to pay for that. Without knowing him, You compared him, in a dreadful way which I have already forgotten, with vermin, and, as so often for people who were dear to me, You had automatically at hand the proverb about dogs and fleas. I remember the actor here especially because at that time I noted down Your pronouncements about him with the remark: “Thus my father speaks about my friend (whom he does not know at all) only because he is my friend. I shall always be able to hold this against him when he reproaches me with lack of filial love and gratitude.” Incomprehensible to me always was Your complete insensibility to what suffering and shame You could inflict on me with Your words and judgments, it was as if You had no notion of Your power. I too have certainly often hurt You with words, but then I always knew it, it pained me, but I could not control myself, could not hold back the word, I regretted it already while I was saying it. But You struck out with Your words without more ado, no one aroused Your pity, not during it, not afterward, against You one was completely defenseless.

But so it was with your whole way of bringing me up. You have, I believe, a talent for bringing up children; to a person of your kind you could certainly have been useful through education; he would have seen the reasonableness of what you said to him, would have troubled himself about nothing further and would have carried the matter out calmly in that way. For me as a child, however, everything you called out to me was nothing less than a commandment from heaven, I never forgot it, it remained for me the most important means of judging the world, above all of judging you yourself, and there you failed completely. Since as a child I was together with you chiefly at meals, your instruction was to a great extent instruction in proper behavior at table. What came onto the table had to be eaten up, one was not allowed to speak about the quality of the food – but you often found the food uneatable; called it “the swill” – the “beast” (the cook) had spoiled it. Because, in keeping with your vigorous hunger and your particular preference, you ate everything quickly, hot and in large bites, the child had to hurry, gloomy silence was at table, interrupted by admonitions: “first eat, then speak” or “faster, faster, faster” or “you see, I have long since finished eating.” One was not allowed to tear bones apart, you were. One was not allowed to slurp vinegar, you were. The main thing was that one cut the bread straight; that you, however, did this with a knife dripping with sauce was a matter of indifference. One had to take care that no scraps of food fell on the floor, under you, after all, lay the most. At table one was allowed to concern oneself only with eating, but you cleaned and cut your nails, sharpened pencils, cleaned your ears with the toothpick. Please, Father, understand me rightly, in themselves these would have been wholly insignificant details, they became oppressive for me only through the fact that you, the man so enormously authoritative for me, did not yourself keep to the commandments which you imposed on me. Through this the world was divided for me into three parts, into one where I, the slave, lived, under laws which had been invented only for me and which, moreover, I did not know why, I could never completely satisfy, then into a second world, infinitely remote from mine, in which you lived, occupied with governing, with issuing orders and with anger over their not being obeyed, and finally into a third world, where the other people lived happily and free from commands and obeying. I was continually in shame, either I obeyed your orders, that was shame, for they applied, after all, only to me; or I was defiant, that too was shame, for how was I permitted to be defiant toward you, or I could not obey, because for example I did not have your strength, not your appetite, not your skill, although you demanded it of me as something self-evident; that indeed was the greatest shame. In this way moved not the reflections, but the feeling of the child.

My situation at that time will perhaps become clearer if I compare it with Felix’s. You do after all treat him similarly too, yes even apply an especially frightful educational measure against him, in that, when at meals he does something in Your opinion unclean, You are not content, as then with me, to say: “You are a big swine,” but add further: “a real Hermann” or “exactly like your father.” Now perhaps this—more than “perhaps” one cannot say—really does Felix no essential harm, for to him You are after all only a grandfather, though admittedly an especially significant one, but still not everything, as You were for me; besides, Felix is a quiet, already now in a certain sense masculine character, who may perhaps be startled by a thunder-voice, but cannot be determined by it permanently; above all, however, he is after all only relatively seldom together with You, also stands under other influences, You are for him more something dear and curious, from which he can choose what he wants to take for himself. To me You were nothing curious, I could not choose, I had to take everything.

And indeed without being able to bring anything forward against it, for it is from the outset not possible for you to speak calmly about a matter with which you do not agree or which merely does not proceed from you; your domineering temperament does not allow it. In recent years you explain this by your heart nervousness, I would not know that you had ever been essentially different, at most the heart nervousness is for you a means toward a stricter exercise of domination, since the thought of it must stifle the last objection in the other person. This is of course no reproach, only the statement of a fact. With Ottla, for instance: “One simply cannot speak with her at all, she jumps at once into one’s face,” you are accustomed to say, but in reality she does not originally jump at all; you confuse the matter with the person; the matter jumps into your face, and you decide it at once without hearing the person; whatever is then still brought forward can only irritate you further, never convince you. Then one hears from you only: “Do what you want; as far as I am concerned you are free; you are of age; I have no advice to give you,” and all this with the dreadful hoarse undertone of anger and of complete condemnation, before which I tremble less today only because the child’s exclusive feeling of guilt has in part been replaced by insight into the helplessness of us both.

The impossibility of calm intercourse had one further, really quite natural consequence: I unlearned speech. I should probably in any case not have become a great orator, but the ordinarily flowing human language I should nevertheless have mastered. But you forbade me the word early on. Your threat: “not a word of contradiction!” and the hand raised with it have accompanied me from the beginning. Before you — you are, as soon as it is a question of your own affairs, an excellent speaker — I acquired a halting, stammering way of speaking, even that was still too much for you, finally I was silent, at first perhaps out of defiance, then because before you I could neither think nor speak. And because you were my actual educator, this continued to have its effect everywhere in my life. It is altogether a strange error when you believe I never submitted to you. “Always everything contra” was really not my principle of life toward you, as you believe and reproach me with. On the contrary: had I followed you less, you would surely have been much more satisfied with me. Rather, all your educational measures struck exactly home; I evaded no grip; as I am, I am (apart from the foundations and the influence of life, of course) the result of your education and of my obedience. That this result is nevertheless painful to you, indeed that you unconsciously refuse to acknowledge it as the result of your education, lies precisely in the fact that your hand and my material were so alien to one another. You said: “Not a word of contradiction!” and meant by it to silence the counter-forces in me that were unpleasant to you, but this influence was too strong for me, I was too obedient, I fell entirely silent, crept away from you and dared to move only when I was so far removed from you that your power, at least directly, no longer reached. But you stood before it, and everything seemed to you again to be “contra,” while it was only the self-evident consequence of your strength and my weakness.

Your extremely effective rhetorical means in upbringing, at least against me never failing, were: scolding, threatening, irony, malicious laughter and—strangely enough—self-pity.

That you had abused me directly and with express abusive words, I cannot remember. It was also not necessary, you had so many other means, and besides, in conversation at home and especially in the business, abusive words flew down all around me in such quantities upon others that I, as a small boy, was sometimes almost stunned by them and had no reason not to take them as applying also to me, for the people whom you abused were certainly not worse than I, and you were certainly not more dissatisfied with them than with me. And here too there was again your enigmatic innocence and unassailability, you abused people without making yourself any sort of scruples about it, indeed you condemned abuse in others and forbade it.

You reinforced the scolding with threats, and that now applied already to me too. Terrible to me, for instance, was this: “I will tear you apart like a fish,” although I did indeed know that nothing worse followed from it (as a small child, of course, I did not know that), but it almost corresponded to my ideas of your power, that you would have been capable of that too. Terrible it was also when, screaming, you ran around the table in order to catch one, plainly did not want to catch one at all, but nevertheless acted so, and Mother finally seemingly saved one. Once again, so it seemed to the child, one had kept one’s life through your grace and carried it on as your undeserved gift. Here too belong the threats about the consequences of disobedience. When I began to do something that did not please you, and you threatened me with failure, then the reverence before your opinion was so great that with that the failure, even if perhaps only for some later time, was unavoidable. I lost confidence in my own doing. I was inconstant, doubtful. The older I became, the greater was the material that you could hold against me as proof of my worthlessness; gradually, in a certain respect, you really became right. Again I guard myself against asserting that I became so only through you; you only strengthened what was there, but you strengthened it very much, because precisely toward me you were very powerful and used all your power for it.

You had a special confidence in education by irony, it also corresponded best to your superiority over me. An admonition with you usually had this form: “Can’t you do it thus and so? That is probably already too much for you? For that of course you have no time?” and the like. With that every such question accompanied by evil laughter and an evil face. One was, in a certain sense, already punished before one even knew that one had done something bad. Provocative too were those reprimands where one was treated as a third person, thus was not even deemed worthy of the evil form of address; where you therefore, for instance, formally spoke to Mother, but actually to me, who was sitting there, for example: “That of course cannot be expected of Mr. Son” and the like. (This then got its counterplay in the fact that I for instance did not dare and later from habit no longer even thought of asking you directly when Mother was present. It was much less dangerous for the child to question the Mother sitting beside you about you, one then asked Mother: “How is Father?” and so secured oneself against surprises.) There were of course also cases where one was very much in agreement with the worst irony, namely when it concerned someone else, for example Elli, with whom I was angry for years. It was for me a feast of malice and Schadenfreude when it was said of her at almost every meal something like: “Ten meters away from the table she has to sit, the fat slug,” and when you then, angry in your chair, without the slightest trace of friendliness or humor, but as an embittered enemy, sought to imitate her exaggeratedly, how extremely repulsive to your taste was the way she sat there. How often that and similar things had to be repeated, how little in fact you achieved by it. I believe it was because the expenditure of anger and being-evil seemed to stand in no proper relation to the matter itself, one did not have the feeling that the anger had been produced by this trifle of sitting-far-from-the-table, but that it was there in its whole magnitude from the very beginning and only by chance had taken just this matter as the occasion for breaking loose. Since one was convinced that an occasion would in any case be found, one did not particularly pull oneself together, and besides, under the continual threat, one became blunted; that one was not beaten, of that one was gradually almost certain. One became a morose, inattentive, disobedient child, always intent on an escape, mostly an inward one. Thus you suffered, thus we suffered. From your standpoint you were quite right when, with clenched teeth and the gurgling laughter which had for the first time conveyed hellish conceptions to the child, you used bitterly to say (as only recently on account of a Constantinople letter): “That is a company!

Quite incompatible with this position toward your children it seemed to be when you, as indeed very often happened, complained publicly. I confess that as a child (later perhaps) I had no feeling for it at all and did not understand how you could expect at all to find sympathy. You were so gigantic in every respect; what could our pity matter to you, or even our help? You really had to despise them, as you so often despised us ourselves. I therefore did not believe the complaints and looked for some secret intention behind them. Only later did I understand that you really suffered very much through the children, but at that time, when the complaints under other circumstances might still have encountered a childish, open, unhesitating disposition ready for any help, they could again be for me only all too distinct means of education and humiliation, as such not very strong in themselves, but with the harmful side effect that the child grew accustomed not to take very seriously precisely things it ought to have taken seriously.

There were fortunately, however, also exceptions to this, mostly when you suffered in silence and love and goodness with their force overcame everything opposed to them and took hold immediately. Rare that was, of course, but it was wonderful. For instance when in earlier times in hot summers at midday after the meal I saw you in the shop sleeping a little from weariness, your elbow on the desk, or when on Sundays you came to us in the summer resort, worn out; or when during a grave illness of Mother’s, trembling from weeping, you held yourself up by the bookcase; or when during my last illness you came softly to me in Ottla’s room, remained on the threshold, only stretched your neck in order to see me in bed, and out of consideration greeted me only with your hand. At such times one lay down and wept for happiness and weeps now again while writing it.

You also have a particularly beautiful, very rarely to be seen kind of quiet, satisfied, approving smile, which can make the one for whom it is intended quite happy. I cannot remember that in my childhood it ever expressly fell to my share, but it may well have happened, for why should you have denied it to me then, when I still seemed innocent to you and was your great hope. Besides, even such friendly impressions in the long run achieved nothing other than to increase my consciousness of guilt and to make the world still more incomprehensible to me.

I preferred to keep to the factual and the continual. In order, in relation to you, to maintain myself only a little, partly also out of a kind of revenge, I soon began to observe, to collect, to exaggerate small ridiculousnesses which I noticed in you. How, for example, you easily let yourself be dazzled by persons mostly only apparently of higher standing, and could go on telling about it constantly, say about some Imperial Councillor or the like (on the other hand something of that kind also hurt me, that you, my father, believed you needed such nugatory confirmations of your value and made much of them). Or I observed your predilection for indecent turns of phrase, brought out as loudly as possible, over which you laughed as though you had said something especially excellent, whereas it was only a flat, little indecency (at the same time, however, it was also again an expression of your vitality which put me to shame). Of such various observations there were of course a great many; I was happy over them, there was occasion for whispering and fun for me, you noticed it sometimes, were annoyed by it, took it for malice, disrespect, but believe me, for me it was nothing other than, moreover, an unserviceable means of self-preservation, they were jokes of the kind one spreads about gods and kings, jokes which not only can be combined with the deepest respect, but even belong to it.

You too, incidentally, corresponding to your similar position toward me, tried a kind of counter-resistance. You used to point out how exaggeratedly well things were going for me and how well I actually had been treated. That is right, but I do not believe that, under the circumstances once in existence, it essentially helped me.

It is true that Mother was boundlessly good to me, but all that stood for me in relation to you, that is, in no good relation. Mother had unconsciously the role of a beater in the hunt. If indeed your upbringing, in some improbable case, could have set me on my own feet through the production of defiance, aversion, or even hatred, then Mother balanced that out again through being good, through sensible speech (in the confusion of childhood she was the primal image of reason), through intercession, and I was driven back again into your circle, out of which otherwise perhaps, to your advantage and mine, I would have broken. Or it was so that no actual reconciliation came about, that Mother merely protected me from you in secret, gave me something in secret, allowed me something, then I was again before you the creature that shuns the light, the deceiver, the guilt-conscious one, who because of his nothingness could come even to what he held to be his right only by secret paths. Naturally I then grew accustomed to seeking on these paths also that to which, even in my own opinion, I had no right. That was again an enlargement of the consciousness of guilt.

It is also true that you scarcely ever really beat me. But the shouting, the reddening of your face, the hurried unfastening of the suspenders, their lying ready over the back of the chair, was for me almost worse. It is as when someone is to be hanged. If he is really hanged, then he is dead and everything is over. But if he must live through all the preparations for being hanged and only when the noose is hanging before his face learns of his pardon, then he can have to suffer from it his whole life long. Besides, from all these many times when, according to your clearly shown opinion, I would have deserved a thrashing, but through your grace had still just escaped it, there accumulated again only a great consciousness of guilt. From all sides I came into your debt.

From the beginning you made it a reproach against me (and indeed against me alone or before others, for the humiliating quality of the latter you had no feeling, the affairs of your children were always public), that thanks to your work I lived without any privations, in quiet, warmth, abundance. I am thinking here of remarks which must positively have drawn furrows in my brain, such as: “Already at seven years old I had to drive with the cart through the villages.” “We all had to sleep in one room.” “We were happy if we had potatoes.” “For years, because of insufficient winter clothing, I had open wounds on my legs.” “As a small boy I already had to go to Pisek into the business.” “From home I got nothing at all, not even when I was in the army, I still sent money home.” “But nevertheless, nevertheless—the father was always the father to me. Who knows that today! What do the children know! No one has suffered that! Does a child understand that today?” Such stories, under other circumstances, could have been an excellent means of education, they could have encouraged and strengthened one to withstand the same plagues and privations through which the father had gone. But that was after all not what you wanted at all, the situation had, precisely through the result of your effort, become a different one, an opportunity to distinguish oneself in the way you had done did not exist. Such an opportunity would first have had to be created by violence and upheaval, one would have had to break out from home (presupposing that one had had the capacity for resolve and the strength for it and that Mother had not on her side worked against it by other means). But all that, after all, was not what you wanted at all, you described it as ingratitude, extravagance, disobedience, betrayal, madness. While therefore on the one side you lured one toward it by example, narrative, and shaming, on the other side you forbade it with the utmost severity. Otherwise, for example, apart from the attendant circumstances, you would really have had to be delighted by Ottla’s Zürau adventure. She wanted to go to the country from which you had come, she wanted to have work and privations such as you had had, she did not want to enjoy the successes of your work, just as you too had been independent of your father. Were these such terrible intentions? So far from your example and your teaching? Good, Ottla’s intentions finally failed in their result, perhaps became somewhat ridiculous, carried out with too much noise, she did not take enough consideration for her parents. But was that exclusively her fault, not also the fault of the circumstances and above all of the fact that you were so estranged from her? Was she perhaps (as you later wanted to persuade yourself) less estranged from you in the business than afterward in Zürau? And would you not quite certainly have had the power (presupposing that you could have overcome yourself to do it), through encouragement, advice, and supervision, perhaps even only through toleration, to make something very good out of this adventure?

Following on such experiences you used to say, in bitter jest, that things were going too well for us. But this jest is in a certain sense none. What you had to fight for, we received from your hand, but the struggle for external life, which was immediately accessible to you and which of course is not spared us either, that we must only late, with the strength of children in manhood, fight through for ourselves. I do not say that our situation is therefore necessarily more unfavorable than yours was, it is rather probably equivalent to it – (whereby, however, the basic dispositions are not compared) – only in this are we at a disadvantage, that with our misery we cannot boast and humiliate anyone with it, as you did with your misery. I also do not deny that it would have been possible that I might really and rightly have enjoyed the fruits of your great and successful labor, made use of them and with them, to your joy, have gone on working, but in the way of this stood precisely our estrangement. I could enjoy what you gave, but only in shame, weariness, weakness, consciousness of guilt. Therefore I could be grateful to you for everything only in a beggarly way, not through deed.

The next outward result of this whole upbringing was that I fled everything that reminded me of You even from afar. First the business. In and of itself, especially in childhood, so long as it was a shop in the alley, it should have given me great pleasure, it was so lively, lit up in the evenings, one saw, one heard a great deal, could help here and there, distinguish oneself, above all admire You in Your magnificent commercial talents, how You sold, handled people, made jokes, were indefatigable, in doubtful cases immediately knew the decision, and so on; even the way You packed something up or opened a crate was a spectacle worth seeing, and the whole thing, all in all, was certainly not the worst school for a child. But since You gradually frightened me from every side, and business and You became identical for me, the business too was no longer comfortable to me. Things that at first had seemed self-evident to me there tormented me, shamed me, especially Your treatment of the staff. I do not know, perhaps it was like that in most businesses (at the Assecurazioni Generali, for example, it really was similar in my time, there I explained my resignation to the director, not quite truthfully, but also not quite falsely, by saying that I could not endure the scolding, which, incidentally, had not directly affected me at all; in this I was already, from home, painfully sensitive), but the other businesses did not concern me in childhood. You, however, I heard and saw in the business shouting, scolding, and raging in a way that, according to my opinion at the time, occurred nowhere else in the whole world. And not only scolding, other tyranny too. How You, for example, threw goods that You did not want confused with others down from the desk with one jerk – only the senselessness of Your anger excused You a little – and the clerk had to pick them up. Or Your constant phrase with regard to a clerk with diseased lungs: “Let him croak, the sick dog.” You called the employees “paid enemies,” and that they were, but even before they had become it, You seemed to me to be their “paying enemy.” There too I received the great lesson that You could be unjust; in myself I would not have noticed it so soon, for there too much feeling of guilt had accumulated that gave You the right; but there, according to my child’s opinion, later of course somewhat, but not too greatly corrected, there were strangers, who after all worked for us and for that had to live in continual fear of You. Of course I exaggerated there, and precisely because I assumed without further ado that You had just as terrible an effect on people as on me. If that had been so, they really could not have lived; but since they were grown people with mostly excellent nerves, they shook off the scolding without difficulty, and in the end it harmed You much more than them. For me, however, it made the business intolerable, it reminded me all too much of my relation to You: You were, quite apart from the entrepreneur’s interest and apart from Your lust for domination, already as a businessman so far superior to everyone who ever learned under You that none of their achievements could satisfy You, similarly eternally unsatisfied You had to be with me too. Therefore I necessarily belonged to the party of the staff, incidentally also because already out of timidity I did not comprehend how one could scold a stranger so, and therefore out of timidity wanted somehow to reconcile the, in my opinion, terribly incensed staff with You, with our family, if only for my own safety. Ordinary, decent conduct toward the staff was no longer enough for that, not even modest conduct was enough any longer, rather I had to be humble, not only greet first, but if possible also ward off the return greeting. And if I, the insignificant person, had licked their feet downstairs, it would still have been no compensation for the way You, the master, hacked away at them upstairs. This relation, into which I entered here with fellow human beings, continued to have its effect beyond the business and on into the future (something similar, but not so dangerous and deep-reaching as with me, is, for example, Ottla’s preference for intercourse with poor people, the sitting together with servant girls and the like that annoys You so much). Finally I was almost afraid of the business, and in any case it had long since ceased to be my affair before I even entered the Gymnasium and was thereby led still farther away from it. It also seemed to me quite beyond the reach of my abilities, since, as You said, it consumed even Yours. You then tried (for me today this is touching and shaming), out of my aversion to the business, to Your work, which nevertheless hurt You very deeply, still to draw a little sweetness for Yourself, by maintaining that I lacked the business sense, that I had higher ideas in my head and the like. Mother was of course glad about this explanation, which You forced from Yourself, and I too, in my vanity and distress, let myself be influenced by it. But if it had really been only or mainly the “higher ideas” that drove me away from the business (which I now, but only now, honestly and actually hate), they would have had to express themselves otherwise than by letting me swim quietly and anxiously through the Gymnasium and through the study of law, until I finally landed at the official’s desk.

If I wanted to flee from you, I had also to flee from the family, even from Mother. With her one could indeed always find protection, but only in relation to you. She loved you too much and was too faithfully devoted to you for her, in the child’s struggle, to have been able, for any length of time, to be an independent spiritual power. A correct instinct of the child’s, incidentally, for Mother became, with the years, ever more closely bound to you; while she always, so far as she herself was concerned, preserved her independence within the smallest limits, beautifully and delicately and without ever essentially offending you, she nevertheless, with the years, ever more completely, more in feeling than in understanding, took over blindly your judgments and condemnations concerning the children, especially in the admittedly difficult case of Ottla. To be sure, one must always keep in mind how tormenting and, to the very end, wearing down Mother’s position in the family was. She wore herself out in the business, in the household, suffered all the family’s illnesses twice over, but the crowning point of all that was what she suffered in her position between us and you. You were always loving and considerate toward her, but in this respect you spared her quite exactly as little as we spared her. Ruthlessly we hammered away at her, you from your side, we from ours. It was a diversion, one thought of nothing evil, one thought only of the struggle that you were carrying on with us, that we were carrying on with you, and on Mother we spent our fury. It was also no good contribution to the education of the children, the way you—without any fault of yours, naturally—tormented her on our account. It even seemingly justified our otherwise unjustifiable behavior toward her. What she suffered from us on your account and from you on ours, quite apart from those cases where you were right, because she spoiled us, even if even this “spoiling” may sometimes have been only a silent, unconscious counter-demonstration against your system. Naturally Mother could not have endured all this if she had not taken from the love for all of us and from the happiness of this love the strength to endure.

The sisters went with me only in part. Happiest in her position toward you was Valli. Standing closest to Mother, she also submitted to you in a similar way, without much effort and harm. But you also accepted her, precisely in memory of Mother, more kindly, although there was little Kafka material in her. But perhaps just that suited you; where there was nothing Kafka-like, even you could demand nothing of that kind; you also did not have, as with the rest of us, the feeling that here something was being lost, which would have to be saved by force. Besides, you may never have particularly loved the Kafka-like, insofar as it expressed itself in women. Valli’s relation to you would perhaps even have become still friendlier, if we others had not disturbed it a little.

Elli is the only example of the almost complete success of a breaking-through out of Your circle. From her I would have expected it least of all in her childhood. She was, after all, such a clumsy, tired, fearful, sullen, guilt-conscious, overhumble, malicious, lazy, nibbling, miserly child, I could hardly look at her, not at all speak to her, so much did she remind me of myself, so similarly did she stand under the same spell of upbringing. Especially her miserliness was hateful to me, since I had it, if possible, still more strongly. Miserliness is indeed one of the most reliable signs of deep unhappiness; I was so unsure of all things that I actually possessed only what I already held in my hands or in my mouth or what at least was on the way there, and precisely that she, who was in a similar situation, most liked to take away from me. But all that changed when in her young years—the most important thing—she went away from home, married, had children, she became cheerful, unconcerned, brave, generous, unselfish, hopeful. Almost unbelievable is it how You actually did not notice this change at all and in any case did not value it according to its merit, so blinded are You by the resentment which You have had against Elli from the beginning and in essence still have unchanged, only that this resentment has now become much less current, since Elli no longer lives with us and besides Your love for Felix and Your affection for Karl have made it less important. Only Gerti must sometimes still pay for it.

Of Ottla I scarcely dare to write – I know, by doing so I am putting at stake the whole hoped-for effect of the letter. Under ordinary circumstances, that is, if she does not perhaps come into special need or danger, You have for her only hatred; You Yourself have, after all, admitted to me that in Your opinion she intentionally causes You suffering and vexation continually, and while You suffer on her account, she is satisfied and rejoices. Thus a kind of devil. What an enormous estrangement, still greater than between You and me, must have come about between You and her, for such an enormous misjudgment to be possible. She is so far from You that You scarcely see her any more, but set a phantom in the place where You suppose her to be. I admit that You had it especially hard with her. I do not, after all, see through the very complicated case entirely, but in any event here there was something like a kind of Löwy, equipped with the best Kafka weapons. Between us it was no real struggle; I was soon finished; what remained was flight, bitterness, grief, inner struggle. But you two were always in fighting position, always fresh, always in possession of your strength. An equally magnificent and comfortless sight. First of all you were certainly very close to one another, for even today, of the four of us, Ottla is perhaps the purest representation of the marriage between You and Mother and of the forces that joined themselves there. I do not know what deprived you of the happiness of concord between father and child, it only lies near for me to believe that the development was similar to mine. On Your side the tyranny of Your nature, on her side Löwy defiance, sensitivity, sense of justice, unrest, and all that supported by the consciousness of Kafka strength. I too have surely influenced her, but hardly from my own impulse, rather through the mere fact of my existence. Besides, she came, as the last, into already established relations of power and could form her judgment herself out of the much material lying ready. I can even imagine that in her nature she wavered for a

An example, instructive in the context of the whole, of your educational effect was Irma. On the one hand she was, after all, a stranger, came into your business already grown up, had to do with you chiefly as her boss, was therefore exposed to your influence only in part and at an age already capable of resistance; on the other hand, however, she was also a blood relation, revered in you her father’s brother, and you had over her much more than the mere power of a boss. And nevertheless she, who in her weak body was so capable, clever, diligent, modest, trustworthy, unselfish, loyal, who loved you as an uncle and admired you as a boss, was no very good employee to you. She was, precisely, naturally urged on into it by us too, in relation to you close to the position of the children, and so great was, still in relation to her too, the bending power of your nature, that in her (though only in relation to you and, I hope, without the deeper suffering of the child) forgetfulness, negligence, gallows humor, perhaps even a little defiance, insofar as she was capable of that at all, developed, while I do not even take into account that she was sickly, was otherwise not very happy either, and that a desolate domestic life weighed upon her. What for me was so rich in connections in your relation to her you summed up in a sentence that became classic for us, almost blasphemous, but precisely for the innocence in your treatment of human beings very evidential: “The blessed departed left me a great deal of filth.

I could describe still further circles of Your influence and of the struggle against it, but here I would already be getting into uncertainty and would have to construct, besides, the farther You remove Yourself from business and family, the more friendly, yielding, courteous, considerate, sympathetic You have always become (I mean also outwardly), just as, for example, even an autocrat, once he is outside the borders of his country, has no reason still to be tyrannical, and can good-naturedly have dealings even with the lowest people. In fact, for example, in the group pictures from Franzensbad You always stood there so large and cheerful among the small sullen people, like a king on his travels. Of this the children too could, of course, have had their advantage, only they would already, what was impossible, in childhood have had to be capable of recognizing it, and I, for example, would not have been allowed to live continually, as it were, in the innermost, strictest, strangling ring of Your influence, as indeed I really did.

Through this I lost not only the sense of family, as you say, on the contrary, rather I still had a sense for the family, though chiefly negatively, for the inner detachment from you, which of course was never to be completed. But the relations with people outside the family suffered through your influence possibly still more. You are quite in error if you believe that for other people I do everything out of love and loyalty, for you and the family nothing, out of coldness and betrayal. I repeat for the tenth time: I should probably, even otherwise, have become a shy, anxious human being, but from there there is still a long, dark road to where I have really come. (Up to now in this letter I have intentionally kept silent about comparatively little, but now and later I shall have to keep silent about some things which — before you and before myself — it is still too hard for me to admit. I say this so that, if the whole picture should here and there become somewhat indistinct, you will not believe that lack of proofs is to blame for it; rather there are proofs which could make the picture unbearably glaring. It is not easy to find a middle course in this.) Here, however, it is enough to recall what was earlier: Before you I had lost self-confidence, and had exchanged it for a boundless consciousness of guilt. (In memory of this boundlessness I once wrote rightly of someone: “He fears the shame will outlive him.”) I could not suddenly transform myself when I came together with other people, rather in relation to them I came into still deeper consciousness of guilt, for I had, as I have already said, to make good to them what you, under my co-responsibility in the business, had been guilty of toward them. Besides, against everyone with whom I had dealings you had, openly or secretly, something to object, and for that too I had to ask his pardon. The mistrust which you tried to instill in me, in business and family, toward most people (name me one person in my childhood in any way significant for me whom you had not at least once criticized down to the very bottom) and which, strangely enough, did not burden you particularly at all (you were simply strong enough to bear it, besides in reality it was perhaps only an emblem of the ruler) — this mistrust, which to me as a little boy was nowhere confirmed by my own eyes, since everywhere I saw only unattainably excellent people, became in me mistrust of myself and continual fear of everything else. There, then, in general, I certainly could not save myself from you. That you were mistaken about this was perhaps due to the fact that of my intercourse with people you actually learned nothing at all, and, mistrustful and jealous (do I deny, then, that you love me?) assumed that for the loss of family life I must compensate myself elsewhere, since it would surely be impossible that outside I lived in just the same way. Moreover, in this respect, precisely in my childhood I still had a certain consolation in the very mistrust of my judgment; I said to myself: “You are exaggerating after all, you feel, as youth always does, small things too much as great exceptions.” But this consolation I later, with increasing view of the world, almost lost.

Just as little rescue from You did I find in Judaism. Here, after all, in itself rescue would have been conceivable, but still more, it would have been conceivable that we both might have found each other in Judaism, or that we might even have gone forth from there united. But what kind of Judaism was that, which I received from You! In the course of the years I placed myself in relation to it in roughly three ways.

As a child, in agreement with You, I reproached myself because I did not go sufficiently to the Temple, did not fast, and so on. I believed that in doing so I was doing wrong not to myself but to You, and a consciousness of guilt, which indeed was always ready, ran through me.

Later, as a young man, I did not understand how You, with the nothing of Judaism which You had at Your disposal, could reproach me because I did not exert myself to carry out a similar nothing (already out of piety, as You put it). It was indeed really, so far as I could see, a nothing, a joke, not even a joke. You went to the Temple on four days in the year, were there at least nearer to the indifferent than to those who took it seriously, patiently dispatched the prayers as a formality, sometimes astonished me by being able to show me in the prayer book the place that was just being recited, for the rest I was allowed, if only I was in the Temple (that was the main thing), to hang about wherever I wanted. I therefore yawned and dazed my way through the many hours there (so bored, I believe, I was later only in dancing lessons) and tried as much as possible to take pleasure in the few little diversions there were there, for instance when the Ark was opened, which always reminded me of shooting galleries, where too, when one hit a black spot, a box door opened, only that there something interesting always came out and here only again and again the old dolls without heads. Besides, I also had much fear there, not only, as was self-evident, of the many people with whom one came into closer contact, but also because You once mentioned in passing that I too could be called up to the Torah. Before that I trembled for years. Otherwise, however, I was not substantially disturbed in my boredom, at most by the Bar Mitzvah, which however demanded only ridiculous learning by heart, thus led only to a ridiculous examination performance, and then, as far as You are concerned, by small, little-significant incidents, for instance when You were called up to the Torah and came through well in this event, which for my feeling was exclusively social, or when You remained in the Temple at the memorial service for the dead and I was sent away, which for a long time, evidently because of the being-sent-away and for lack of any deeper participation, called forth in me the hardly conscious feeling that what was involved here was something indecent. – So it was in the Temple, at home it was if possible still poorer and limited itself to the first Seder evening, which more and more became a comedy with fits of laughter, admittedly under the influence of the growing children. (Why did You have to submit to this influence? Because You had called it forth.) That then was the material of faith that was handed down to me, to this was added at most the outstretched hand which pointed to “the sons of the millionaire Fuchs,” who on high holidays were in the Temple with their father. How one could do anything better with this material than get rid of it as quickly as possible, I did not understand; precisely this getting-rid-of-it seemed to me to be the most pious action.

Still later, however, I did after all look at it differently again and understood why you were entitled to believe that in this respect too I was maliciously betraying you. You had really brought with you from the small ghetto-like village community still something of Judaism, it was not much and it lost itself a little more in the city and in the army, nevertheless the impressions and memories of youth still barely sufficed for a kind of Jewish life, especially since you did not, after all, need much such help, but were of a very vigorous stock and in your own person could hardly be shaken by religious scruples, if they did not become very much mixed with social scruples. At bottom the faith guiding your life consisted in this, that you believed in the unconditional rightness of the opinions of a particular Jewish social class and actually therefore, since these opinions belonged to your being, believed in yourself. In that too there still lay enough Judaism, but for being handed down further it was too little as against the child, it dripped away entirely while you were passing it on. In part they were untransmittable impressions of youth, in part your dreaded nature. It was also impossible to make comprehensible to a child observing over-sharply out of sheer anxiety that the few trivialities which you performed in the name of Judaism with an indifference corresponding to their triviality could have a higher meaning. For you they had meaning as small mementos from earlier times, and therefore you wanted to convey them to me, but could do this, since they had, after all, no value in themselves any longer even for you, only by persuasion or threat; on the one hand this could not succeed and on the other hand, since you did not at all recognize your weak position here, it had to make you very angry with me because of my apparent obstinacy.

The whole thing is, after all, no isolated phenomenon, things were similar with a large part of this Jewish transitional generation, which emigrated from the relatively still pious countryside into the cities; that followed of itself, only it added to our relationship, which after all had no lack of sharpnesses, one more that was painful enough. On the other hand, You should indeed in this point too, just as I do, believe in Your guiltlessness, but explain this guiltlessness by Your nature and by the conditions of the time, not merely by the external circumstances, that is, not say, for instance, that You had had too much other work and too many worries to be able to occupy Yourself with such things as well. In this way You are accustomed to turn Your indubitable guiltlessness into an unjust reproach against others. That is then everywhere, and here too, very easy to refute. It would surely not have been a matter of some instruction or other which You ought to have given Your children, but of an exemplary life; if Your Judaism had been stronger, Your example would also have been more compelling, that is of course self-evident and again no reproach at all, but only a defense against Your reproaches. You recently read Franklin’s recollections of his youth. I really did give them to You to read deliberately, but not, as You remarked ironically, because of a little passage about vegetarianism, but because of the relation between the author and his father, as it is described there, and the relation between the author and his son, as it expresses itself of its own accord in these recollections written for the son. I do not want to single out details here.

A certain subsequent confirmation of this view of your Judaism I also received through your behavior in recent years, when it seemed to you that I was occupying myself more with Jewish things. Since from the outset you have an aversion to every one of my occupations and especially to the manner of my taking an interest, you had it here too. But beyond that one might nevertheless have expected that here you would make a small exception. It was, after all, Judaism of your Judaism that was stirring here, and with it therefore also the possibility of the linking-up of new relations between us. I do not deny that these things, if you had shown interest in them, could precisely thereby have become suspect to me. It certainly does not occur to me to want to maintain that in this respect I am in any way better than you. But it never came to the test of that at all. Through my mediation Judaism became loathsome to you, Jewish writings unreadable, they “disgusted you.” That could mean that you insisted that only exactly the Judaism as you had shown it to me in my childhood was the only right one, beyond that there was nothing. But that you should insist on that was nevertheless hardly conceivable. Then, however, the “disgust” (apart from the fact that at first it was directed not against Judaism but against my person) could only mean that unconsciously you acknowledged the weakness of your Judaism and of my Jewish education, wanted in no way to be reminded of it, and answered all reminders with open hatred. Besides, your negative high estimation of my new Judaism was very much exaggerated; first, after all, it bore your curse within itself, and second, for its development the fundamental relation to one’s fellow human beings was decisive, in my case therefore deadly.

More accurately, with your aversion you struck my writing and what, unknown to you, was connected with it. Here I had in fact got a piece of the way independently away from you, even if it was a little reminiscent of the worm which, trodden down at the rear by a foot, tears itself loose with its front part and drags itself to the side. I was to some extent in safety, there was a drawing of breath; the aversion which you of course at once had against my writing too was here, by way of exception, welcome to me. My vanity, my ambition did indeed suffer under your greeting of my books, which became famous among us: “Put it on the bedside table!” (most of the time you were, after all, playing cards when a book came), but fundamentally I was nevertheless well at that, not only out of rebellious malice, not only out of joy over a new confirmation of my conception of our relation, but quite originally because that formula sounded to me something like: “Now you are free!” Of course it was a deception, I was not free, or in the most favorable case not yet free. My writing dealt with you, there I was indeed only complaining of what I could not complain of at your breast. It was a farewell from you deliberately drawn out at length, only that, though it was forced by you, it ran in the direction determined by me. But how little all that was! It is, after all, worth speaking of at all only because it happened in my life, elsewhere it would not be noticed at all, and then also because in childhood as a foreboding, later as a hope, still later often as despair, it ruled my life and dictated to me—if one likes, then again in your form—my few small decisions.

For example the choice of profession. Certainly, You gave me here complete freedom in Your generous and in this sense even patient way. To be sure, in this You were also following the general treatment of sons, authoritative for You, of the Jewish middle class, or at least the value judgments of that class. Finally, one of Your misunderstandings with regard to my person also had an effect here. For You have always considered me, out of paternal pride, out of ignorance of my actual existence, out of inferences drawn from my frailty, particularly industrious. As a child, in Your opinion, I was always studying, and later always writing. Now this is not true in the least. Rather, with much less exaggeration, one can say that I studied little and learned nothing; that something remained sticking in all those many years, with an average memory, with a not altogether worst power of comprehension, is not very remarkable, but in any case the total result in knowledge, and especially in the grounding of knowledge, is extremely wretched in comparison with the expenditure of time and money in the midst of an outwardly carefree, quiet life, especially also in comparison with almost all people I know. It is wretched, but understandable to me. Since I have been able to think, I had such deepest cares about the assertion of my spiritual existence that everything else was indifferent to me. Jewish Gymnasium pupils among us are easily remarkable, one finds there the most improbable things, but my cold, scarcely veiled, indestructible, childishly helpless, ridiculous, animal-like self-satisfied indifference of a child sufficient unto himself, but coldly fantastic, I have never found again anywhere else, though here it was also the only protection against the destruction of the nerves by fear and consciousness of guilt. Only care about myself occupied me, but this in the most various ways. For instance as care about my health; it began lightly, here and there there arose a small apprehension about digestion, loss of hair, a curvature of the spine, and so on, this increased in uncountable gradations, finally it ended with a real illness. But since I was sure of no thing, needed from every moment a new confirmation of my existence, nothing was in my actual, indubitable, sole possession, unambiguously determined only by me, in truth I was a disinherited son, naturally even what was nearest to me, my own body, became uncertain to me; I shot up tall, but knew nothing to do with it, the burden was too heavy, the back became crooked; I hardly dared to move, let alone do gymnastics, I remained weak; I marveled at everything over which I still disposed as a miracle, for instance my good digestion; that was enough to lose it, and with that the way to all hypochondria was open, until then, under the superhuman exertion of wanting-to-marry (of this I shall speak yet), blood came from the lung, in which the apartment in the Schönborn Palace — which, however, I needed only because I believed I needed it for my writing, so that this too belongs on this sheet — may well have had enough share. So all this did not come from excessive work, as You always imagine it. There were years in which, in full health, I lazed away more time on the sofa than You in Your whole life, all illnesses included. When I ran away from You looking most occupied, it was usually in order to lie down in my room. My total work performance both in the office (where, to be sure, laziness does not attract very much notice and was moreover kept within bounds by my anxiety) and also at home is tiny; if You had an overview of it, it would horrify You. Probably I am by disposition not at all lazy, but there was nothing for me to do. There, where I lived, I was rejected, sentenced, beaten down, and to flee elsewhere, though it strained me extremely, was no work, for it was a matter of the impossible, which, apart from small exceptions, was unattainable for my strength.

In this condition, then, I received the freedom to choose a profession. But was I still at all capable of actually making use of such a freedom? Did I still trust myself to be able to attain a real profession? My valuation of myself was much more dependent on You than on anything else, on an outward success, for instance. That was the strengthening of a moment, nothing more, but on the other side Your weight always dragged much more strongly downward. I would never get through the first class of elementary school, I thought, but it succeeded, I even received a prize; but the entrance examination for the Gymnasium I would certainly not pass, but it succeeded; but now in the first class of the Gymnasium I shall definitely fail, no, I did not fail and it kept on succeeding further and further. From this, however, no confidence resulted, on the contrary, I was always convinced—and in Your rejecting expression I positively hold the proof of it—that the more I succeed, the worse it must finally turn out. Often in my mind I saw the dreadful assembly of the professors (the Gymnasium is only the most unified example, everywhere around me it was similar), how they, when I had got through the Prima, thus in the Sekunda, when I had got through this, thus in the Tertia and so on, would come together in order to investigate this unique, heaven-crying case, how it had been possible for me, the most incapable and in any case the most ignorant, to sneak my way up into this class, which, now that the general attention had been directed toward me, would naturally at once spew me out, to the jubilation of all the righteous relieved of this nightmare. — To live with such imaginings is not easy for a child. What, under these circumstances, did the instruction matter to me. Who was in a position to strike out of me one spark of participation? The instruction interested me—and not only the instruction, but everything round about at this decisive age—about as the small current banking business interests a bank defrauder, who is still in his position and trembles before discovery, and which he still has to carry out as an official. So small, so distant was everything beside the main matter. It then went on as far as the Matura, through which I really got already in part only by swindle, and then it halted, now I was free. If already, in spite of the compulsion of the Gymnasium, I had concerned myself only with myself, how much more now, when I was free. Thus there was for me no actual freedom in the choice of profession, I knew: everything will, in comparison with the main matter, be just as indifferent to me as all subjects of instruction in the Gymnasium, it is therefore a question of finding a profession which, without injuring my vanity too much, most readily permits me this indifference. Thus law was the self-evident thing. Small contrary attempts of vanity, of senseless hope, like two weeks’ study of chemistry, half a year’s study of German, only strengthened that fundamental conviction. I studied law, then. That meant that in the few months before the examinations, with abundant carrying-along of the nerves, I spiritually positively nourished myself on wood-meal, which moreover had already been pre-chewed for me by thousands of mouths. But in a certain sense just that tasted good to me, as in a certain sense earlier the Gymnasium too and later the civil-service profession, for all this corresponded completely to my situation. In any case I showed here astonishing foresight, already as a small child I had, with regard to studies and profession, enough clear premonitions. From here I expected no rescue, here I had long since renounced it.

But I showed no foresight at all with regard to the significance and possibility of a marriage for me; this, until now the greatest terror of my life, came upon me almost wholly unexpectedly. The child had developed so slowly, these things lay outwardly altogether too far aside from him; here and there the necessity arose of thinking of them; that here, however, a lasting, decisive, and even the bitterest test was being prepared, was not to be recognized. In reality, however, the attempts at marriage became the most splendid and most hopeful attempt at rescue, correspondingly splendid then, to be sure, was also the failure.

I fear, because in this region everything fails me, that I shall also not succeed in making these attempts at marriage understandable to You. And yet the success of the whole letter depends on it, for in these attempts, on the one hand, everything was assembled that I had at my disposal in the way of positive forces, on the other hand there also gathered here, positively with fury, all the negative forces which I have described as a co-result of Your upbringing, that is, the weakness, the lack of self-confidence, the consciousness of guilt, and they drew, as it were, a cordon between me and marriage. The explanation will be difficult for me also because here, over so many days and nights, I have again and again thought through and dug through everything, so that even me the mere sight of it now already confuses. The explanation is made easier for me only by Your, in my opinion, complete misunderstanding of the matter; to correct such a complete misunderstanding a little does not seem excessively difficult.

To begin with you place the failure of the marriages in the series of my other failures; against that I would in itself have nothing, provided that you accept my previous explanation of the failure. It does in fact stand in this series, only you underestimate the significance of the matter and underestimate it in such a way that we, when we speak with one another about it, are actually speaking of quite different things. I venture to say that in your whole life nothing has happened to you which would have had such a significance for you as the attempts at marriage had for me. By this I do not mean that in itself you had experienced nothing so significant, on the contrary, your life was much richer and more care-laden and more crowded than mine, but for that very reason nothing of this sort has happened to you. It is as if one man has to climb up five low stair-steps and a second only one stair-step, which however, at least for him, is as high as those five together; the first will not only master the five, but hundreds and thousands more besides, he will have led a great and very strenuous life, but none of the steps that he has climbed will have had such a significance for him as, for the second, that one, first, high step, impossible for all his powers to climb, to which he does not get up and beyond which, naturally, he also does not get.

To marry, to found a family, to accept all children who come, to maintain them in this uncertain world and even guide them a little, is in my conviction the utmost that can succeed for a human being at all. That it apparently succeeds easily for so many is no counterproof, for first it does not in fact succeed for many, and secondly these not-many mostly do not “do” it, rather it merely “happens” to them; that is indeed not that utmost, but still very great and very honorable (especially since “doing” and “happening” cannot be cleanly separated from one another). And finally it is not at all a matter of this utmost, but only of some distant, but decent approximation; it is, after all, not necessary to fly right into the middle of the sun, but still to crawl as far as a clean little place on the earth, where sometimes the sun shines and one can warm oneself a little.

How, then, was I prepared for this? As badly as possible. That is already evident from what has gone before. Insofar, however, as there is for this a direct preparation of the individual and a direct creation of the general basic conditions, you did not outwardly intervene much. Nor is it possible otherwise, here the general sexual customs of class, people, and time decide. All the same you intervened even there, not much, for the prerequisite of such intervention can only be strong mutual trust, and that had long since been lacking in both of us at the decisive time, and not very happily, because after all our needs were quite different; what grips me need hardly touch you and conversely, what with you is innocence can with me be guilt and conversely, what with you remains without consequence can be my coffin lid.

I remember, once in the evening I went walking with You and Mother, it was on Josephsplatz near the present Länderbank, and stupidly boastful, superior, proud, cool (that was untrue), cold (that was genuine) and stammering, as after all I mostly spoke with You, began to speak of the interesting things, reproached you both that I had been left uninstructed, that first my schoolmates had had to take me in hand, that I had been in the neighborhood of great dangers (here, after my fashion, I lied shamelessly, in order to show myself courageous, for as a consequence of my timidity I had no more precise conception of the “great dangers”), but indicated in conclusion that now, fortunately, I already knew everything, needed no more advice, and everything was in order. In any case I had begun to speak of it chiefly because it gave me pleasure at least to speak of it, then also out of curiosity and finally also in order somehow to avenge myself on you both for something or other. You took it, in accordance with Your nature, very simply, You said only something like that You could give me a piece of advice how I would be able to carry on these things without danger. Perhaps I had wanted to lure out just such an answer, it did indeed correspond to the lustfulness of the child overfed with meat and all good things, physically inactive, eternally occupied with himself, but still my outward shame was thereby so wounded or I believed it must be so wounded that, against my will, I could no longer speak with You about it and haughtily, insolently broke off the conversation.

It is not easy to judge Your answer at that time. On the one hand it does have something crushingly open, in a certain sense primeval, on the other hand, however, as far as the doctrine itself is concerned, it is very modernly unconcerned. I do not know how old I was then, certainly not much older than sixteen. For such a boy, however, it was after all a very strange answer, and the distance between us both shows itself also in the fact that this was actually the first direct, life-embracing instruction that I received from You. Its real meaning, however, which even then sank into me, but only much later came half into consciousness, was the following: That which You advised me to do was, after all, in Your opinion and still more in my opinion at the time, the dirtiest thing there was. That You wanted to see to it that physically I brought none of the dirt home was incidental, by that You were only protecting Yourself, Your house. The main thing, rather, was that You remained outside Your advice, a husband, a pure man, exalted above these things; this was probably sharpened for me then still further by the fact that marriage too seemed shameless to me and it was therefore impossible for me to apply to my parents what I had heard in general about marriage. Through this You became still purer, rose still higher. The thought that before marriage You too might perhaps have been able to give Yourself similar advice was completely unthinkable to me. Thus there was almost no little remnant of earthly dirt on You. And precisely You thrust me, as though I were destined for it, with a few open words, down into this dirt. If the world consisted, then, only of me and You, an idea that lay very near to me, then this purity of the world ended with You, and with me, by force of Your advice, began the dirt. In itself it was, after all, incomprehensible that You condemned me in this way, only old guilt and the deepest contempt on Your part could explain it to me. And with that I was therefore touched again in my innermost being, and very hard.

Here perhaps the guiltlessness of us both becomes clearest. A gives B an open piece of advice, corresponding to his conception of life, not very beautiful, but even today in the city quite customary, perhaps preventing damage to health. This advice is morally not very strengthening for B, but why should he not be able, in the course of the years, to work his way out of the damage, besides he need not follow the advice at all, and in any case in the advice alone there lies no cause for B’s whole future world, say, to collapse over him. And yet something of this kind happens, but precisely only because A is you and B is I.

This mutual guiltlessness I can survey particularly well also because a similar collision between us, under quite different circumstances, occurred again some twenty years later, as a fact horrifying, in and of itself however much less harmful, for where was there then, in me as a thirty-six-year-old, anything that could still be harmed. By this I mean a little discussion on one of the few agitated days after the communication of my last intention to marry. You said to me something like: “She has probably put on some specially chosen blouse, as the Prague Jewesses know how to do, and on the strength of that you have of course decided to marry her. And indeed as quickly as possible, in a week, tomorrow, today. I do not understand you, you are after all a grown man, are in the city, and know no other counsel for yourself than at once to marry some woman at random. Are there no other possibilities there? If you are afraid of that, I myself will go there with you.” You spoke at greater length and more distinctly, but I can no longer remember the details, perhaps it also grew a little foggy before my eyes, almost the mother interested me more, how she, though completely in agreement with you, nevertheless took something from the table and with it went out of the room.

More deeply you have hardly humiliated me with words, and more clearly you have never shown me your contempt. When twenty years ago you had spoken to me in a similar way, one could, through your eyes, even have seen in it a certain respect for the precocious city boy, who in your opinion could already be introduced into life so directly, without detours. Today this consideration could only increase the contempt, for the boy who then took a run at it has remained stuck in it and seems to you today not richer by any experience, but only more wretched by twenty years. My decision for a girl meant absolutely nothing to you. You had always, unconsciously, held down my power of decision and now believed, unconsciously, that you knew what it was worth. Of my attempts at rescue in other directions you knew nothing, therefore you could also know nothing of the trains of thought that had led me to this attempt at marriage, had to try to guess them and, in accordance with the general judgment you had of me, guessed at the most abominable, clumsiest, most ridiculous thing. And did not hesitate for a moment to tell me this in just such a way. The shame you thereby inflicted on me was nothing to you in comparison with the shame which, in your opinion, I would bring upon your name through the marriage.

Now, with regard to my attempts at marriage, you can indeed answer me many things, and have done so too: you could not have much respect for my decision if I dissolved the engagement with F. twice and took it up again twice, if I dragged you and Mother uselessly to Berlin for the engagement, and the like. All that is true, but how did it come about?

The basic idea of both attempts at marriage was quite correct: to found a household, to become independent. An idea which is indeed sympathetic to You, only that then in reality it turns out as in the children’s game where one holds the other’s hand and even presses it and at the same time cries: “Oh do go, do go, why don’t You go?” Which, however, in our case has been complicated by the fact that You have always honestly meant the “do go!”, since You just as always, without knowing it, merely by virtue of Your nature have held me or more correctly held me down.

Both girls were indeed chosen by chance, but extraordinarily well. Again a sign of Your complete misunderstanding, that You can believe that I, the anxious, hesitating, suspicious one, decide with one jerk upon a marriage, perhaps out of delight over a blouse. Both marriages would rather have become marriages of reason, insofar as it is thereby said that day and night, the first time for years, the second time for months, all my power of thought was turned upon the plan.

Neither of the girls disappointed me, only I disappointed them both. My judgment of them today is exactly the same as then, when I wanted to marry them.

Nor is it the case that in the second attempt at marriage I had disregarded the experiences of the first attempt, that is, had been frivolous. The cases were simply quite different, precisely the earlier experiences could in the second case, which was altogether much more promising, give me hope. Of details I do not want to speak here.

Why then have I not married? There were individual obstacles, as everywhere, but in the taking of such obstacles life, after all, consists. The essential obstacle, unfortunately independent of the individual case, was however that I am evidently intellectually incapable of marrying. This shows itself in the fact that from the moment in which I resolve to marry, I can no longer sleep, my head glows day and night, it is no life anymore, I stagger about desperately. These are not really worries that cause this, although, in accordance with my heaviness of blood and pedantry, countless worries run along with it too, but they are not the decisive thing, they do indeed, like worms, complete the work upon the corpse, but I am decisively struck by something else. It is the general pressure of fear, of weakness, of self-contempt.

I will try to explain it more closely: Here, in the attempt at marriage, in my relations to You, two things apparently opposed come together more strongly than anywhere else. Marriage is certainly the guarantee of the sharpest self-liberation and independence. I would have a family, the highest thing, in my opinion, that one can attain, and therefore also the highest thing that You have attained, I would be Your equal, all old and eternally new disgrace and tyranny would be merely history. That would indeed be fairy-tale-like, but in that already lies the questionable thing. It is too much, so much cannot be attained. It is as if someone were imprisoned and he had not only the intention of fleeing, which perhaps would be attainable, but also and indeed at the same time the intention of rebuilding the prison into a pleasure-palace for himself. But if he flees, he cannot rebuild, and if he rebuilds, he cannot flee. If I, in the special relation of misfortune in which I stand to You, want to become independent, I must do something that as far as possible has no relation to You – marrying is indeed the greatest thing and gives the most honorable independence, but it is also at the same time in the closest relation to You. To want to get out here has therefore something of madness, and every attempt is almost punished with it.

Precisely this close relation, after all, partly entices me to marriage too. I imagine this equality, which would then arise between us and which You could understand as no other, as beautiful for that very reason, because then I could be a free, grateful, guiltless, upright son, You could be an unoppressed, untyrannical, sympathetic, satisfied father. But for that purpose everything that has happened would have to be made not to have happened, that is, we ourselves would have to be crossed out.

As we are, however, marriage is closed to me by the fact that it is precisely your very own domain. Sometimes I imagine the map of the earth spread out and you stretched out across it. And then it seems to me as if for my life only those regions came into consideration which you either do not cover or which do not lie within your reach. And these, corresponding to the conception I have of your greatness, are not many and not very consoling regions, and in particular marriage is not among them.

This comparison alone proves that I by no means want to say that you, by your example, drove me out of marriage, in something like the way you drove me out of the business. On the contrary, despite all distant similarity. In your marriage I had before me a marriage in many respects exemplary, exemplary in fidelity, mutual help, number of children, and even when the children then grew up and disturbed the peace more and more, the marriage as such remained untouched by it. Perhaps precisely on this example my high conception of marriage was also formed; that the desire for marriage was powerless had, after all, other reasons. They lay in your relation to the children, of which the whole letter indeed treats.

There is an opinion according to which the fear of marriage sometimes derives from the fact that one fears the children will later repay one for what one has oneself sinned against one’s own parents. That, I believe, has no very great significance in my case, for my consciousness of guilt really derives from you and is also too much permeated by its uniqueness, indeed this feeling of uniqueness belongs to its tormenting nature, a repetition is unimaginable. Nevertheless I must say that such a mute, dull, dry, decayed son would be unbearable to me, I would probably, if there were no other possibility, flee from him, emigrate, as you at first wanted to do on account of my marriage. Thus I may also, in my incapacity for marriage, be partly influenced by this.

Much more important, however, in this is the fear for myself. This is to be understood as follows: I have already indicated that in writing and in what is connected with it I have made small attempts at independence, attempts at flight with the very smallest success, they will hardly lead any further, much confirms this to me. Nevertheless it is my duty or rather my life consists in watching over them, in letting no danger which I can ward off, indeed no possibility of such a danger, come near them. Marriage is the possibility of such a danger, to be sure also the possibility of the greatest furtherance, but it is enough for me that it is the possibility of a danger. What would I begin to do then, if it were nevertheless a danger! How could I go on living in marriage in the perhaps unprovable, but in any case irrefutable feeling of this danger! In the face of this I may indeed waver, but the final outcome is certain, I must renounce. The comparison of the sparrow in the hand and the dove on the roof fits here only very remotely. In my hand I have nothing, on the roof is everything and yet I must — so the conditions of the struggle and the necessity of life decide it — choose the nothing. Similarly I had, after all, also to choose in the choice of a profession.

But the most important obstacle to marriage is the already ineradicable conviction that for the preservation of a family and even more for its governance there necessarily belongs everything that I have recognized in you, and indeed everything together, good and bad, just as it is organically united in you, thus strength and mockery of the other, health and a certain excessiveness, gift of speech and insufficiency, self-confidence and dissatisfaction with every other person, superiority to the world and tyranny, knowledge of men and mistrust toward most of them, then also merits without any disadvantage, such as industry, endurance, presence of mind, fearlessness. Of all this I had, comparatively, almost nothing or only very little, and with that did I want to dare to marry, while I nevertheless saw that even you had a hard struggle in marriage and, in relation to the children, even failed? This question I naturally did not put to myself expressly and did not answer expressly, otherwise ordinary thinking would indeed have taken possession of the matter and shown me other men who are different from you (to name one close at hand, very different from you: Uncle Richard) and nevertheless have married and at least have not collapsed under it, which is already very much and would have been amply enough for me. But precisely this question I did not put, rather I lived it from childhood on. I did not, after all, first test myself in relation to marriage, but in relation to every little thing; in relation to every little thing you convinced me, through your example and through your upbringing, as I have tried to describe it, of my incapacity, and what was true in every little thing and proved you right had, naturally, to be monstrously true before the greatest thing, that is, before marriage. Up to the attempts at marriage I grew up somewhat like a businessman who, to be sure, with worries and bad forebodings, but without exact bookkeeping, lives from one day into the next. He has a few small profits, which, because of their rarity, he continually fondles and exaggerates in his imagination, and otherwise only daily losses. Everything is entered, but never balanced. Now comes the compulsion to make the balance, that is, the attempt at marriage. And with the great sums with which one has to reckon here, it is as though there had never been even the smallest profit, everything one single great debt. And now marry, without going mad!

Thus ends my life with you up to now, and such prospects it bears within itself for the future.

You could, if You survey my justification of the fear that I have of You, answer: “You maintain that I make things easy for myself when I explain my relation to You simply by Your fault, but I believe that, despite outward exertion, You make things for Yourself at least no more difficult, but much more profitable. First of all You too reject every guilt and responsibility for Yourself, in that, then, our procedure is the same. But while I then, as openly as I also mean it, ascribe the sole guilt to You, You want at the same time to be ‘over-clever’ and ‘over-tender’ and also to absolve me of every guilt. Naturally You succeed in the latter only in appearance (more than that You do not want either), and between the lines, despite all the ‘phrases’ about essence and nature and opposition and helplessness, it emerges that actually I have been the attacker, while everything You have done has been only self-defense. Now, then, through Your insincerity You would already have achieved enough, for You have proved three things, first that You are innocent, second that I am guilty, and third that You, out of sheer magnanimity, are prepared not only to forgive me, but, what is more and less, also still to prove and to want to believe it Yourself, that I, though indeed contrary to the truth, am also innocent. That could now already be enough for You, but it is not yet enough for You. For You have got it into Your head to want to live wholly and entirely off me. I admit that we fight with each other, but there are two kinds of fight. The knightly fight, where the powers of independent opponents measure themselves, each remains for himself, loses for himself, wins for himself. And the fight of vermin, which not only stings, but at once also, for the preservation of its life, sucks the blood. That is, indeed, the true professional soldier, and that is You. You are unfit for life; but in order to arrange Yourself comfortably, carelessly and without self-reproach in that, You prove that I have taken all Your fitness for life away from You and put it into my pockets. What does it matter to You now if You are unfit for life, I have the responsibility. But You stretch Yourself out calmly and let Yourself, bodily and mentally, be dragged through life by me. An example: when recently You wanted to marry, You wanted, as You admit in this letter, at the same time not to marry, but wanted, in order not to have to exert Yourself, that I should help You not to marry by forbidding You this marriage because of the ‘disgrace’ that the connection would bring upon my name. But that did not occur to me at all. First, I wanted here as elsewhere never ‘to be an obstacle to Your happiness,’ and second, I never want to have to hear such a reproach from my child. But did the self-overcoming with which I left You free to marry help me at all? Not in the least. My aversion to the marriage would not have prevented it, on the contrary, it would in itself have been one more inducement for You to marry the girl, for the ‘attempt at flight,’ as You express it, would thereby have become complete. And my permission for the marriage did not prevent Your reproaches, for You prove, indeed, that in any case I am to blame for Your not marrying. Fundamentally, however, here and in everything else, You have proved to me nothing other than that all my reproaches were justified and that among them one especially justified reproach had still been lacking, namely the reproach of insincerity, of servility, of parasitism. If I am not very much mistaken, You are parasitizing me even with this letter as such.

To this I answer that, to begin with, this whole objection, which in part can also be turned against you, does not come from you, but precisely from me. For not even your mistrust of others is so great as my mistrust of myself, to which you have brought me up. A certain justification of the objection, which indeed in itself also contributes something new to the characterization of our relationship, I do not deny. Thus of course in reality things cannot fit together as the proofs in my letter do, life is more than a patience-game; but with the correction which results from this objection, a correction which in detail I neither can nor will carry out, in my opinion something nevertheless so very close to the truth has been reached that it can calm us both a little and make living and dying easier.
