I write this quite certainly out of despair over my body and over the future with this body.

If despair presents itself so certainly, is so bound to its object, so held back as by a soldier who covers the retreat and lets himself be torn to pieces for it, then it is not the right despair. The right despair has at once and always overtaken its goal, (at this comma it becomes apparent that only the first sentence was right).

“If he is always asking me.” The ä, detached from the sentence, flew away like a ball on the meadow.

His earnestness is killing me. The head in the collar, the hair arranged motionlessly around the skull, the muscles below at the cheeks tensed in their place ...

Is the forest still there? The forest was still pretty much there. Hardly, however, had my glance gone ten paces, when I gave up, caught again by the boring conversation.

In the dark forest, in the soaked-through ground, I found my bearings only by the white of his collar. The four entries that follow the first seem to belong together as beginnings of a story, but have been separated from one another by Kafka with cross-lines.

In the dream I begged the dancer Eduardowa, would she please dance the Csárdás once more. She had a broad strip of shadow or light in the middle of her face between the lower edge of the forehead and the middle of the chin. Just then someone came, with the disgusting movements of the unconscious intriguer, to tell her the train was about to leave. By the way in which she listened to the report, it became terribly clear to me that she would not dance any more. “I am a bad wicked woman, am I not?” she said. “Oh no,” I said, “not that,” and turned in some arbitrary direction to go. Before that I questioned her about the many flowers that were stuck in her belt. “They are from all the princes of Europe,” she said. I reflected on what meaning it could have, that these flowers, freshly stuck in the belt, had been given to the dancer Eduardowa by all the princes of Europe.

The dancer Eduardowa, a lover of music, travels, as everywhere, so also in the electric tram, in the company of two violinists, whom she often lets play. For there is no prohibition why music should not be played in the electric tram, if the playing is good, agreeable to the fellow passengers and costs nothing, that is, if afterward no collection is taken up. It is, admittedly, at the beginning a little surprising, and for a little while everyone finds it improper. But at full speed, with a strong draft and a quiet street, it sounds pretty.

The dancer Eduardowa is not so pretty in the open air as on the stage. The pale color, these cheekbones, which stretch the skin so that in the face there is hardly any stronger movement, the large nose, which rises as if out of a hollow, with which one can make no jokes – such as testing the hardness of the tip or lightly taking hold of it at the bridge of the nose and pulling it back and forth, while saying: “But now you are coming with me.” The broad figure with high waist in overly folded skirts – whom can that please – she resembles one of my aunts, an elderly lady, many older aunts of many people look similar. For these disadvantages, however, in Eduardowa in the open air, apart from the quite good feet, actually no compensation is to be found, there is really nothing there that would give cause for rapture, astonishment, or even merely respect. And so I have also very often seen Eduardowa treated with an indifference which even otherwise very adroit, very correct gentlemen could not conceal, although naturally they made much effort in this direction, toward such a well-known dancer as Eduardowa, after all, was.

My auricle felt fresh, rough, cool, juicy, like a leaf.

I write this quite definitely out of despair over my body and over the future with this body.

If despair gives itself so definitely, is so bound to its object, so held back as by a soldier who covers the retreat and lets himself be torn to pieces for it, then it is not the right despair. The right despair has immediately and always already overtaken its goal, (at this comma it becomes apparent that only the first sentence was right).

Are you desperate? Yes? you are desperate? Running away? Want to hide yourself? In the manuscript pen drawings follow here. In the further manuscript too they are found rather often.

The white-seamstresses in the downpours. The entry of December 16, 1910, concerning Hauptmann’s The Maidens of Bischofsberg refers to this remark.

Finally, after five months of my life in which I could write nothing with which I would have been satisfied, and which no power will replace for me, although all would be obliged to do so, I hit upon the idea of addressing myself once again. To this I still always answered, when I really questioned myself, there was still something to be beaten out of me, out of this heap of straw which I have been for five months and whose fate it seems to be, in summer to be set alight and to burn, more quickly than the spectator blinks his eyes. If only that would happen to me! And tenfold should that happen to me, for I do not even regret the ill-starred time. My condition is not unhappiness, but it is also not happiness, not indifference, not weakness, not fatigue, not another interest, so what then is it? That I do not know this is probably connected with my inability to write. And this I believe I understand, without knowing its ground. For all the things that occur to me do not occur to me from the root onward, but only somewhere toward their middle. Let someone then try to hold them, let someone try to hold a blade of grass and himself by it, which only begins to grow in the middle of the stalk. This perhaps certain individuals can do, for example Japanese acrobats, who climb on a ladder that does not rest on the ground, but on the raised soles of a half-reclining man, and that does not lean against the wall, but merely goes up into the air. I cannot do it, apart from the fact that my ladder does not even have those soles at its disposal. That is of course not everything, and such an inquiry does not yet bring me to speech. But every day at least one line is to be directed against me, as telescopes are now directed against the comet. And if then one day I were to appear before that sentence, lured forth by that sentence, as for example I was last Christmas and where I had come so far that I could only just still take hold of myself, and where I really seemed to be on the last rung of my ladder, which however stood calmly on the ground and against the wall. But what a ground, what a wall! And yet that ladder did not fall, so firmly did my feet press it to the ground, so firmly did my feet raise it against the wall.

Today, for example, I committed three pieces of insolence, toward a conductor, toward someone introduced to me, so, there were only two, but they pain me like stomach pains. On the part of any human being they would have been insolences, how much more on my part. I went therefore out of myself, fought in the air in the fog, and the worst thing: that no one noticed, that even toward my companions I committed the insolence as an insolence, had to commit it, had to bear the proper expression, the responsibility; but the worst was when one of my acquaintances took this insolence not even as the sign of a character, but as the character itself, drew my attention to my insolence and admired it. Why do I not remain in myself? Now I tell myself, to be sure: look, the world lets itself be beaten by you, the conductor and the person introduced remain calm, as you went away, the latter even greeted you. But that means nothing. You can achieve nothing if you leave yourself, but what, besides, do you miss in your circle. To this address I answer only: I too would rather let myself be thrashed in the circle than outside do the thrashing myself, but where the devil is this circle? For a while I did see it lying on the ground, as if sprayed out with lime, now, however, it merely hovers about before me, indeed it does not even hover.

Comet night 17/18 May. Been together with Blei, his wife and his child, from time to time heard myself out of myself, like the whimpering of a young cat in passing, but still. How many days have again passed by mute; today is the 28th of May. Have I not even the resolution to take this penholder, this piece of wood, in my hand daily. I do believe that I do not have it. I row, ride, swim, lie in the sun. Therefore the calves are good, the thighs not bad, the belly still passable, but already the chest is very shabby and if my head in the nape of the neck ...

Sunday, the 19th of July 1910, slept, woke up, slept, woke up, miserable life.

Variant Often I consider it and let the thoughts run their course, without interfering, and always, however I turn it, I come to the conclusion that in many respects my upbringing has harmed me terribly. In this recognition there lies a reproach, which goes against a great many people. There are the parents with the relatives, a quite definite cook, the teachers, some writers—the love with which they harmed me makes their guilt still greater, for how greatly they might have, with love ..., some families friendly with the family, a swimming instructor, natives of the summer resorts, some ladies in the city park, whom one would certainly not suspect of it, a barber, a beggar-woman, a helmsman, the family doctor and many others besides, and there would be still more if I wanted and were able to designate them all by name, in short, there are so many that one must take care not to name one twice in the crowd. Now one might think that by this great number alone a reproach loses in firmness and simply must lose in firmness, for a reproach is no general, it goes only straight ahead and does not know how to distribute itself. Especially in this case, when it is directed against persons of the past. The persons may be held fast in memory with a forgotten energy, they will scarcely any longer have a floor beneath them, and even their legs will already be smoke. And people in such a condition one is now supposed, with any profit, to reproach for faults which they once made in former times in the upbringing of a boy who is now as incomprehensible to them as they are to us. But one cannot even bring them to remember those times, no human being can force them to do so, but evidently one cannot speak of forcing at all, they can remember nothing, and if one presses in upon them, they silently push one aside, for most probably they do not hear the words at all. Like tired dogs they stand there, because they use up all their strength in order to remain upright in memory. But if one really brought them to hear and to speak, then one’s ears would merely roar with counter-reproaches, for human beings take with them into the beyond the conviction of the venerability of the dead and from there defend it tenfold. And if this opinion perhaps were not right and the dead had a particularly great reverence for the living, then they would all the more take the part of their living past, which after all stands nearest to them, and again our ears would roar. And if this opinion too were not right and the dead were precisely very impartial, then even so they could never approve of one’s disturbing them with unprovable reproaches. For such reproaches are already unprovable from human being to human being. The existence of past mistakes in upbringing is [not] to be proved, how much less the authorship. And now show me the reproach which in such a situation would not transform itself into a sigh. That is the reproach which I have to raise. It has a healthy interior, theory sustains it. That which in me has really been spoiled, however, I forget for the time being or forgive it and as yet make no noise with it. On the other hand I can prove at any moment that my upbringing wanted to make another person out of me than the one I have become. The harm, then, which my educators according to their intention could have inflicted on me, that I make into a reproach against them, demand from their hands the person I now am, and since they cannot give him to me, out of reproach and laughter I make against them a drumming all the way into the world beyond. Yet all this serves only another purpose. The reproach over the fact that they did after all spoil a piece of me—a good beautiful piece they spoiled—in dreams it sometimes appears to me as the dead bride does to others—this reproach, which is always on the point of becoming a sigh, is above all to get across undamaged, as an honest reproach, which it also is. So it happens, the great reproach, to which nothing can happen, takes the little one by the hand, the great one walks, the little one hops, but once the little one is over there, he even distinguishes himself, we have always expected it, and to the drum he blows the trumpet. Often I consider it and let the thoughts run their course, without interfering, but always I come to the conclusion that my upbringing has spoiled me more than I can understand. In my exterior I am a human being like others, for my bodily upbringing kept as much to the usual as my body too was

When I consider it, I must say that my upbringing has done me very great harm in many directions. I was, after all, not brought up somewhere apart, perhaps in a ruin in the mountains, against that I could indeed not bring out a single word of reproach. At the risk that the whole row of my former teachers cannot understand this, gladly and most gladly would I have been that little dweller in ruins, burnt up, by the sun, which there among the ruins from all sides would have shone upon the lukewarm ivy for me, even if in the beginning I would have been weak under the pressure of my good qualities, which with the power of weeds would have grown up in me.

When I consider it, I must say that my upbringing has done me very great harm in many directions. This reproach strikes a great number of people, namely my parents, some relatives, individual visitors to our house, various writers, one quite definite cook, who led me to school for a year, a heap of teachers (whom in my memory I must press tightly together, otherwise now and then one escapes me, but since I have pressed them together so, the whole thing again crumbles away in places), a school inspector, slowly walking passers-by, in short, this reproach winds like a dagger through society and no one, I repeat, unfortunately no one is sure that the dagger’s point will not one day suddenly appear in front, behind, or from the side. To this reproach I will hear no contradiction, since I have already heard too many, and since in most contradictions I have also been refuted, I include these contradictions in my reproach and now declare, my upbringing and this refutation have done me very great harm in many directions.

Often I consider it, and always then I must say that my upbringing has in many respects done me great harm. This reproach is directed against a great many people, admittedly they stand here together, know, as in old group pictures, nothing to do with one another, it does not exactly occur to them to cast down their eyes and to smile they do not dare, out of expectation. There are my parents, some relatives, some teachers, a quite definite cook, some girls from dancing lessons, some visitors to our house from former times, some writers, a swimming-master, a ticket-taker, a school inspector, then some whom I met only once in the street, and others whom I cannot just now remember, and such as I shall never remember any more, and finally such whose instruction, somehow distracted at the time, I did not notice at all, in short, there are so many that one must take care not to name one twice. And to all of them I speak my reproach, in this way make them acquainted with one another, but tolerate no contradiction. For I have truly already endured enough contradictions, and since in most of them I have been refuted, I can do nothing other than include these refutations too in my reproach and say that, besides my upbringing, these refutations too have in many respects done me great harm.

Does one perhaps expect that I was brought up somewhere apart? No, in the middle of the city I was brought up, in the middle of the city. Not, for example, in a ruin in the mountains or by the lake. My parents and their following were until now covered by my reproach and gray, now they push it lightly aside and smile, because I have drawn my hands away from them to my forehead and think: I should have been the little inhabitant of ruins, listening into the cries of the jackdaws, flown over by their shadows, cooling under the moon, even if at the beginning I would have been a little weak under the pressure of my good qualities, which would have had to grow in me with the power of weeds, burnt by the sun, which through the rubble would have shone upon me from all sides onto my bed of ivy.

It is reported, and we are disposed to believe it, that men in danger regard even beautiful strange women as nothing; they thrust them against the wall, thrust them with head and hands, knees and elbows, once they have been hindered by these women in their flight from the burning theatre. Then our talkative women are silent, their endless speaking gets verb and period, the eyebrows rise up out of their resting position, the breathing movement of thighs and hips ceases, into the mouth only loosely closed with fear more air than usual rushes and the cheeks seem a little puffed out.

Here follows, without title, the story “Unhappiness” from “Meditation” (cf. “Stories and Short Prose”). The notes to this volume were composed in 1937 for the first edition of Franz Kafka’s diaries — “Diaries and Letters.” [Selection]. Prague: Heinrich Mercy Sohn (= Collected Writings. Edited by Max Brod in collaboration with Heinz Politzer) 1937. — The volume “Stories and Short Prose” mentioned here — Berlin: Schocken (= Collected Writings. Edited by Max Brod in collaboration with Heinz Politzer. Volume I) 1935 — corresponds in this edition to the volume “Stories.” (Ed. note.) This draft breaks off a few lines before the end. On a new page there follows a mere title, “The Little Ruin-Dweller,” which evidently stands in connection with the preceding fragments of a critique of education. The subsequent fragments form a mosaic difficult to order, in which many broken pieces are repeated several times. The story begins again and again with the same words and still in 1911 strikes individual waves. — The whole has many points of contact with several chapters of the story “Description of a Struggle,” cf. especially the “Conversation with the Man at Prayer”; further also with the study published by Kafka, “Unmasking a Confidence Trickster.”

“You,” I said and gave him a little shove with my knee (at the sudden speaking some saliva flew from my mouth as a bad omen), “don’t fall asleep!

I am not falling asleep,” he answered, and while opening his eyes shook his head. “If I fell asleep, how then could I watch over you? And must I not do that? Did you not then, in front of the church, hold fast to me for that very reason? Yes, it is already long ago, we know it, just leave the watch in your pocket.” “It is, you see, already very late,” I said. I had to smile a little, and in order to hide it, I looked intently into the house.

Do you really like it so? You would like, then, to go up, very much like to? Then say it, I won’t bite you, after all. Look, if you believe that things will go better for you up there than down here, then simply go up, at once, without thinking of me. That it is my view, that is, the view of any passer-by at all, that you will soon come down again, and that it will then be very good if here in some fashion someone is standing whose face you will not look at at all, but who takes you under the arm, strengthens you with wine in a nearby tavern and then leads you to his room, which, wretched as it is, still has a few panes between itself and the night, at this view you can for the time being whistle. It is true, I can repeat that before whomever you like, down here things go badly with us, yes they go even dog-miserably with us, but for me there is no help any more, whether I lie here in the gutter and dam up the rainwater or up there under the chandelier drink champagne with the same lips, it makes no difference to me. Besides, I have not even the choice between these two things, nothing of that sort ever happens to me, such as makes people take notice, how could it happen either, under the structure of the ceremonies necessary for me, under which I can only keep crawling on, no better than vermin. You, however, who knows what all is hidden in you. You have courage, at least you believe you have it, try it then, what are you risking—often one recognizes oneself already, if one pays attention, in the face of the servant at the door.

Variant “You,” I said and gave him a little shove with my knee (at the sudden speaking a little saliva flew from my mouth as a bad omen), “you are falling asleep.” “I have not forgotten you,” he said, and shook his head already while opening his eyes. “I did not fear it either,” I said. I passed over his smile and looked at the pavement. “I only wanted to tell you that now in any case I shall go up. For as you know, I am invited upstairs, it is already late and the company is waiting for me. Perhaps individual events will be postponed until I come. I do not want to assert it, but possible it is all the same. You will now ask me whether perhaps I could not altogether do without the company.” “That I shall not ask, for first of all you are, after all, burning to tell it to me, and secondly it does not concern me, for to me down here and up there are quite the same. Whether I lie down here in the gutter and dam up the rainwater or up there drink champagne with the same lips, that makes no difference to me, not even in taste, which incidentally I can easily get over, for neither the one nor the other is permitted to me, and therefore it is not right if I compare myself with you. For you! How long have you actually been in the city? How long you have been in the city, I ask.” “Five months. But I already know it exactly too. You, I have given myself no rest. When I look back like this, I do not know at all whether nights have occurred, it all seems to me, can you imagine it, like one day, and there there were no times of day, not even differences of light.

If only I knew definitely that you are sincere with me. I would have been upstairs long ago. How could I possibly find out whether you are sincere with me? You are looking at me now as if I were a little child, that does not help me, that makes it, after all, still worse. But perhaps you want to make it worse. Besides, I can no longer bear the air in the street, so much do I already belong upstairs in the company. If I pay attention, it scratches me in the throat, there you have it, by the way, I am coughing. And have you any notion how it will go with me upstairs? The foot with which I shall enter the hall will already be transformed before I draw the other after it.

You are right, I am not sincere with you.

I do want to get away, want up the stairs, if it must be under somersaults. From society I promise myself everything that I lack, the organization of my powers above all, for which such a sharpening is not enough as constitutes the only possibility of this bachelor on the street. He is already content, after all, if with his, admittedly shabby, corporeality he holds out, protects his few meals, avoids influences of other people, in short, keeps as much as in the dissolving world is only possible. But what he loses, that he seeks by force, be it also changed, weakened, indeed be it also only apparently his former property (and that it is for the most part), to get back again. His nature is therefore a suicidal one, it has teeth only for its own flesh and flesh only for its own teeth. For without having a center, without having a profession, a love, a family, a pension, that is, without maintaining oneself on the large scale over against the world, experimentally of course only, without therefore, through a great complex of possessions, as it were dazzling it, one cannot preserve oneself from losses that destroy at the instant. This bachelor with his thin clothes, his art of prayer, his enduring legs, his feared rented apartment, his otherwise pieced-together being, this time called forth again after a long time, holds all this together with both arms and must always lose two of his things when he catches any single slight one at random. Naturally here lies the truth, the truth nowhere to be shown so purely. For whoever really appears as a completed citizen, thus travels on the sea in a ship, with foam before him and with wake behind him, thus with much effect all around, quite otherwise than the man on his few pieces of wood in the waves, which still mutually jostle and press one another down — he, this gentleman and citizen, is in no smaller danger. For he and his property are not one, but two, and whoever smashes the connection smashes him along with it. We and our acquaintances are, after all, in this respect unrecognizable, because we are entirely covered over, I for example am now covered over by my profession, by my imagined or real sufferings, by literary inclinations, and so on. But precisely I feel my ground much too often and too strongly for me to be able to be even halfway satisfied. And I need only feel this ground uninterruptedly for a quarter of an hour and the poisonous world will flow into my mouth like the water into the drowning man.

Between me and the bachelor there is at the moment hardly any difference, only that I can still think of my youth in the village and perhaps, if I want, perhaps even then, if only my situation demands it, can throw myself back there. But the bachelor has nothing before him and therefore also nothing behind him. At the moment there is no difference, but the bachelor has only the moment. In that time, which today no one can know, for nothing can be so annihilated as that time, in that time he missed it, when he continually felt his ground, just as one suddenly notices on one’s body an ulcer, which until now was the last thing on our body, indeed not even the last, for it seemed not yet to exist, and which now is more than everything that since our birth we bodily possessed. If until now we were, with our whole person, directed toward the work of our hands, toward what was seen by our eyes, toward what was heard by our ears, toward the steps of our feet, then suddenly we turn ourselves wholly into the opposite, like a weather-vane in the mountains.

Instead now, at that time, of running away, even if in this last direction, for only running away could keep him on his tiptoes and only his tiptoes could keep him in the world, instead of that he lay down, as in winter here and there children lay themselves down in the snow, in order to freeze to death. He and these children, they know, after all, that it is their fault, that they have lain down or otherwise given way, they know that at no price should they have done it, but they cannot know it, that after the change which is now happening with them in the fields or in the city, they will forget every earlier guilt and every compulsion and that they will move in the new element as if it were their first. But forgetting is not the right word here. This man’s memory has suffered as little as his imagination. But they simply cannot move mountains; the man stands now once and for all outside our people, outside our humanity, he is forever famished, only the moment belongs to him, the ever-continuing moment of torment, which is followed by not a spark of a moment of rest, he has always only one thing: his pains, but in the whole circumference of the world no second thing that could put itself forward as medicine, he has only as much ground as his two feet need, only as much hold as his two hands cover, therefore so much less than the trapeze artist in the variety theatre, for whom below they have still hung up a safety net.

Us others, after all, our past and future hold us. Almost all our idleness and how much of our occupation we spend in letting them, in equilibrium, float up and float down. What the future has in advance in extent, the past makes up for in weight, and at their end the two are indeed no longer to be distinguished, earliest youth later becomes bright, as the future is, and the end of the future, with all our sighs, has actually already been experienced and is past. Thus this circle, along whose rim we go, almost closes. Now, this circle belongs to us, indeed, but belongs to us only so long as we hold it, if only once we move to the side, in some self-forgetfulness, in a distraction, a fright, an astonishment, a weariness, already we have lost it into space, till now we had our nose stuck in the stream of times, now we step back, swimmers who have been, present strollers, and are lost. We are outside the law, no one knows it and yet everyone treats us accordingly.

You must not think of me now. How would you even compare yourself with me? I have, after all, been here in the city for over twenty years already. Do you even imagine properly what that is? Twenty times I have spent every season here.” – Now he shakes his loose fist over our heads. – “The trees here have grown upward for twenty years, how small one ought to become beneath them. And these many nights, you know, in all those apartments. Once one lies against this wall, once against that one, and so the window wanders around one. And these mornings, one looks out of the window, pulls the armchair away from the bed and sits down to coffee. And these evenings, one props up the arm and with the hand holds the ear. Yes, if only that were not all! If only one at least adopted a few new habits, such as are to be seen here in the lanes every day. – Now it perhaps seems to you as if I wanted to complain about it? But no, why complain about it, neither the one nor the other is permitted me. I have only to make my promenades, and with that it is to be enough, for that, however, there is not yet any place in the world on which I could not make my promenades. But now it looks again as if I were vain about it.”

“I have it easy, then. I would not have to remain standing here before the house.”

“In that, then, do not compare yourself with me and do not let yourself be made uncertain by me. You are, after all, a grown man, are moreover, as it seems, rather abandoned here in the city.

I am indeed close to it. Already my protective being seemed to be dissolving here in the city, I was beautiful in the first days, for this dissolution occurs as an apotheosis, where everything that keeps us alive flies away from us, but while still flying away irradiates us for the last time with its human light. Thus I stand before my bachelor, and for that reason he most probably loves me, without, however, being clear to himself about why. Occasionally his speeches seem to indicate that he knows his way about, that he knows whom he has before him and that for that reason he may permit himself everything. No, but that is not how it is. In this manner he would rather meet everyone, for he can live only as a hermit or as a parasite. He is a hermit only from compulsion, once this compulsion is overcome by forces unknown to him, at once he is a parasite, who brazenly clings on as best he can. Save him, however, nothing more in the world can, and so in his behavior one can think of the corpse of a drowned man which, driven to the surface by some current or other, bumps against a tired swimmer, lays its hands on him and would like to hold fast. The corpse will not come alive, indeed will not even be recovered, but the man it can pull down.

6 November. Conférence of a Madame Ch. on Musset. Jewish women’s habit of smacking their lips. Understanding of the French through all the preparations and difficulties of the anecdote, until just before the final word, which, on the ruins of the whole anecdote, is to go on living in the heart, the French goes out before our eyes, perhaps we have strained ourselves too much up to then, the people who understand French go away before the end, since they have already heard enough, the others have by no means heard enough yet, acoustics of the hall, which favor the coughing in the boxes more than the spoken word; supper at Rachel’s, she reads Racine’s Phèdre with Musset, the book lies between them on the table, on which, incidentally, every possible thing is lying.

Consul Claudel, brilliance in the eyes, which the broad face takes up and reflects back, he wants to take his leave continually, in individual cases he succeeds too, but in general not, for when he has taken leave of one person, a new one is standing there, to whom the one already dismissed attaches himself again. Above the lecture platform there is a gallery for the orchestra. Every possible noise disturbs. Waiters from the corridor, guests in their rooms, a piano, a distant string orchestra, a hammering at last, a quarrel whose localization causes great difficulties and therefore irritates. In one box a lady with diamonds in her earrings, whose light changes almost without interruption. At the cash desk young people dressed in black from a French cercle. One greets with a sharp bow, which lets his eyes run along over the floor. At the same time he smiles strongly. But he does this only before girls; men he looks straight in the face immediately afterward, with his mouth held serious, by which at the same time he explains the previous greeting as a perhaps ridiculous, but in any case unavoidable, ceremony.

7 November. Wiegler’s lecture—Paul Wiegler, the translator of the ›Moralités légendaires‹ by Jules Laforgue. This translation, later also the original, became a great experience for Kafka and me. The strong influence of Laforgue’s verses is also perceptible in some of Werfel’s poems. – Paul Wiegler later wrote ›French Theatre of the Past‹, furthermore a very extensive and learned ›History of German Literature‹, among other things. He was an editor in Berlin, in Prague, then again in Berlin (at Ullstein). He died in 1949.—on Hebbel. Sits on the stage in the decoration of a modern room, as if his beloved would spring in through a door, in order finally to begin the play. No, he is lecturing. Hebbel’s hunger. Complicated relation to Elisa Lensing. At school he has an old maid as teacher, who smokes, takes snuff, beats, and gives raisins to the good ones. He travels everywhere (Heidelberg, Munich, Paris) without any quite visible intention. Is first servant to a parish bailiff, sleeps in one bed with the coachman under the stairs.

Julius Schnorr von Carolsfeld – drawing Friedrich Olivier, he is drawing on a slope, how beautiful and serious he is there (a tall hat like a flattened clown’s cap with a stiff, narrow brim going into the face, long wavy hair, eyes only for his picture, quiet hands, the board on his knees, one foot has slipped a little lower on the bank). But no, that is Friedrich Olivier, drawn by Schnorr.

15 November, ten o’clock. I shall not let myself become tired. I shall jump into my novella and even if it should cut my face to pieces.

16 November, twelve o’clock. I am reading ›Iphigenia in Tauris‹. In it really, apart from individual openly faulty passages, the dried-out German language in the mouth of a pure boy is positively to be wondered at. Every word is carried by the verse before the reader at the moment of reading up to the height where it stands in a perhaps meagre, but penetrating light.

27 November. Bernhard Kellermann read aloud. “Some unpublished things from my pen,” so he began. Apparently a dear man, almost gray hair standing up, with difficulty smoothly shaved, pointed nose, over the cheekbones the flesh of the cheeks often goes up and down like a wave. He is a mediocre writer with good passages (a man goes out into the corridor, coughs and looks around to see whether no one is there), also an honest man, who wants to read what he has promised, but the audience did not let him, out of fright over the first story about a nerve-sanatorium, out of boredom over the manner of the reading the people, despite the poor tensions of the story, kept going away one by one with a zeal as if there were a reading next door. When after the first third of the story he drank a little mineral water, a whole mass of people went away. He was startled. “It is almost finished,” he simply lied. When he was finished, everything stood up, there was some applause, which sounded as if in the midst of all the standing people one had remained sitting and was clapping for himself. But now Kellermann wanted still to go on reading, another story, perhaps still several. Against the departure he only opened his mouth. Finally, after he had been advised, he said: “I should still like to read a little fairy tale, which lasts only fifteen minutes. I shall make a five-minute pause.” A few still remained, whereupon he read a fairy tale which had passages that would have entitled anyone to run from the outermost place in the hall straight through and over all the listeners and out.

15 December. I simply do not believe my conclusions from my present condition, now already lasting almost a year, for my condition is too serious for that. I do not even know whether I can say that it is not a new condition. My real opinion, however, is: this condition is new, similar ones I have had, but not yet one such as this. I am indeed as if made of stone, like my own grave monument I am, there is no gap there for doubt or for belief, for love or aversion, for courage or fear in the particular or in general, only a vague hope lives, but no better than the inscriptions on grave monuments. Almost no word that I write fits the next, I hear how the consonants arrange themselves tinny against one another, and the vowels sing along like exhibition Negroes. My doubts stand around every word in a circle, I see them earlier than the word, but what then! I do not see the word at all, I invent it. That would not yet be the greatest misfortune, only then I would have to be able to invent words which are capable of blowing the corpse-smell in one direction, so that it does not come at once into my face and the reader’s. When I sit down at the writing desk, I feel no more at ease than someone who falls in the middle of the traffic of the Place de l’Opéra and breaks both legs. All the carriages, despite their clamor, strive silently from all sides toward all sides, but better order than the policemen make is made by that man’s pain, which closes his eyes and lays waste the square and the streets, without the carriages having to turn around. The much life pains him, for he is indeed an obstruction to traffic, but the emptiness is no less bad, for it sets loose his real pain.

16 December. I shall not leave the diary any more. Here I must hold fast, for only here can I do it. Gladly I should like to explain the feeling of happiness that from time to time, as just now, I have in me. It is really something effervescent, which with a slight, pleasant twitching fills me wholly and entirely and talks me into capacities of whose nonexistence I can convince myself at every moment, even now, with all certainty.

Hebbel praises Justinus Kerner’s Travel Shadows. “And such a work scarcely exists, no one knows it.”

The Street of Abandonment by W. Fred. How are such books written? A man who in small things brings off what is competent here stretches his talent in so miserable a way into the largeness of a novel that one feels sick, even if one does not forget to admire the energy in the maltreatment of one’s own talent.

This pursuing of incidental persons of whom I read in novels, plays, etc. This feeling of belonging together that I have there! In The Maidens of the Bishop’s Mountain, a comedy by Gerhart Hauptmann. (is it called that?) mention is made of two seamstresses who make the linen for the one bride in the play. How are these two girls getting on? Where do they live? What have they done that they are not allowed into the play with the others, but, literally outside before Noah’s Ark, drowning under the downpours, are allowed for the last time only to press their face against a cabin window, so that the spectator in the stalls sees for a moment something dark there?

17 December. Zeno, in answer to an urgent question whether then nothing is at rest, said: Yes, the flying arrow is at rest.

If the French, by their nature, were Germans, how much more would they then be admired by the Germans.

That I have put aside and crossed out so much, indeed almost everything that I have written at all in this year, that in any case also hinders me very much in writing. It is, after all, a mountain, it is five times as much as I have ever written at all, and already through its mass it draws everything that I write away from under my pen, over to itself.

18 December. If it were not beyond doubt that the reason for the fact that I leave letters (even those of presumably insignificant content, as just now one) lying unopened for a time, is only weakness and cowardice, which hesitates over the opening of a letter just as it would hesitate to open the door of a room in which a human being perhaps already waits for me impatiently, then one could explain this leaving-lying of the letters much better by thoroughness. Assuming, namely, that I am a thorough person, then I must try to draw out as much as possible everything that concerns the letter, that is, already to open it slowly, to read it slowly and many times, to reflect for a long time, with many drafts to prepare the fair copy, and finally still to hesitate over sending it off. All that lies within my power, only just the sudden receiving of the letter cannot be avoided. Well, I slow even that down in an artificial way, I do not open it for a long time, it lies on the table before me, continually it offers itself to me, continually I receive it, but do not take it.

Evening, half past eleven. That I, so long as I am not freed from my office, am simply lost, this is clearer to me than anything, it is only a matter, as long as it goes on, of holding my head so high that I do not drown. How difficult that will be, what forces it will have to draw out of me, is shown already by the fact that today I have not kept to my new division of time, to be at the writing desk from eight to eleven o’clock in the evening, that even at present I do not consider this such a great misfortune, that I have written down these few lines only hastily, in order to get to bed.

19 December. Begun working in the office. Afternoon at Max’s.

Read a little of Goethe’s diaries. Distance already holds this life fast in calm, these diaries set fire to it. The clarity of all occurrences makes them mysterious, just as a park railing gives the eye rest, in the contemplation of broad lawns, and yet sets us in an unequal respect.

Just now my married sister is coming to visit us for the first time. Kafka left behind three sisters and their families. All three sisters, including Kafka’s favorite sister Ottla, died in extermination camps, as did two brothers-in-law, a nephew and a niece, as well as many of the people mentioned in the diaries who were close to Kafka.

20 December. With what do I excuse yesterday’s remark about Goethe (which is almost as untrue as the feeling described by it, for the real one has been driven away by my sister)? With nothing. With what do I excuse the fact that today I have still written nothing? With nothing. Especially since my condition is not the worst. I have continually an invocation in my ear: “Would you came, invisible court!”

So that these false passages, which at no price will come out of the story, may finally leave me in peace, I write two of them here:

His breaths were loud like sighs over a dream in which misfortune is easier to bear than in our world, so that simple breaths are already sufficient sighing.” “Now I survey him as freely as one surveys a little patience puzzle, of which one says to oneself: What does it matter that I cannot get the little balls into their hollows, everything belongs to me after all, the glass, the setting, the little balls, and whatever else is there; the whole art I can simply put in my pocket.”

December 21. Curiosities from Deeds of the Great Alexander by Mikhail Kuzmin:

“Child whose upper half dead, lower alive, child’s corpse with the moving red little legs.”

“The unclean kings Gog and Magog, who fed on worms and flies, he drove into burst rocks and sealed them until the end of the world with the seal of Solomon.”

“Stone rivers, where in place of water stones rolled with a roar, past the sand brooks, which flow three days long toward the south and three days toward the north.”

“Amazons, women with burned-out right breasts, short hair, men’s footwear.”

Been at Baum’s, heard such beautiful things. I frail as formerly and always. To have the feeling of being bound, and at the same time the other one, that, if one were unbound, it would be still worse.

December 22. Today I do not even dare to reproach myself. Called into this empty day, that would have a disgusting echo.

24 December. Now I have looked at my writing desk more closely and seen that on it nothing good can be done. So much lies about here and forms a disorder without evenness and without any tolerability among the disordered things, which otherwise makes every disorder bearable. Let there be on the green cloth a disorder as it will, that too was permitted in the pit of the old theatres. That however out of the standing places ...

25 December. ... out of the open compartment under the desk-top superstructure brochures, old newspapers, catalogues, picture postcards, letters, all partly torn, partly opened, come forth in the form of an open staircase, this unworthy condition spoils everything. Individual, comparatively gigantic things of the parterre appear in the greatest possible activity, as if it were permitted in the theatre that in the auditorium the merchant puts his account books in order, the carpenter hammers, the officer swings his sabre, the clergyman speaks to the heart, the scholar to the understanding, the politician to civic sense, that the lovers do not restrain themselves, etc. Only on my writing desk the shaving mirror stands upright, as one needs it for shaving, the clothes brush lies with its bristle surface on the table, the purse lies open in case I want to pay, from the bunch of keys a key projects ready for work, and the necktie still winds itself partly around the collar that has been taken off. The next higher open compartment of the superstructure, already narrowed by the small closed side drawers, is nothing but a junk room, as if the low balcony of the auditorium, fundamentally the most visible place in the theatre, were reserved for the commonest people, for old men of pleasure, in whom the dirt gradually comes from the inside to the outside, rough fellows who let their feet hang down over the balcony railing. Families with so many children that one looks only briefly, without being able to count them, set up here the dirt of poor children’s rooms (it is already running down into the parterre), in the dark background incurably sick people sit, one sees them fortunately only when one shines a light in, etc. In this compartment lie old papers which I would long ago have thrown away if I had a wastepaper basket, pencils with broken-off points, an empty matchbox, a paperweight from Karlsbad, a ruler with an edge whose bumpiness would be too bad for a country road, many collar studs, blunt razor-blade inserts (for them there is no place in the world), tie clips, and still another heavy iron paperweight. In the compartment above —

Wretched, wretched and yet well meant. It is midnight, of course, but that, since I have slept very well, is only an excuse insofar as by day I would have written nothing at all. The lit incandescent lamp, the silent apartment, the darkness outside, the last moments of wakefulness, they give me the right to write, even if it should be the most wretched thing. And this right I use hastily. So that is me.

26 December. Two and a half days I was—though not completely—alone and already I am, if not transformed, still on the way. Being alone has a power over me that never fails. My inner self loosens itself (for the time being only superficially) and is ready to let something deeper come forth. A little order of my inner self begins to establish itself, and I need nothing more, for disorder where there are small capacities is the worst thing.

27 December. My strength no longer suffices for any sentence. Yes, if it were a matter of words, if it were enough to add a word and one could turn away in the calm consciousness of having filled this word entirely with oneself.

I partly slept away the afternoon, during the time of wakefulness I lay on the sofa, thought over a few love experiences from my youth, stopped, angrily, at a missed opportunity (at that time I was lying in bed with a slight cold and my governess was reading the Kreutzer Sonata to me, in which she knew how to enjoy my agitation), imagined the vegetarian evening meal, was satisfied with my digestion and had fears as to whether my eyesight will suffice for my whole life.

28 December. If I have behaved humanly for a few hours, as today with Max and later at Baum’s, I am already haughty before going to sleep.

3 January. “You,” I said, and thereupon gave him a little push with my knee.

I want to take my leave.” At the sudden speaking some spittle flew from my mouth as a bad omen. “You have certainly thought that over a long time,” he said, stepped away from the wall and stretched.

“No, I have not thought it over at all.”

“For the last time I have still prepared myself a little for society. Exert yourself as much as you can, you will not understand that. I, an arbitrary man from the provinces, whom one can at any moment exchange for one of those who stand together by the hundreds before the railway stations for particular trains.”

The wet fingers of the gallery visitors beneath me, who wipe their eyes.

January 6. “You,” I said, aimed and gave him a little push with my knee, “now I am going, though. If you want to look on at it, open your eyes.”

“So after all?” he asked, while he looked at me out of completely open eyes with a straight gaze, which, however, was nevertheless so weak that I could have warded it off with a waving of the arm. “So you are going after all? What am I to do? I cannot hold you. And if I could, I do not want to. By that I only want to enlighten you about your feeling, according to which you could nevertheless be held back by me.” And at once he put on the face of the low servants, with which, within an otherwise regulated state, they may make the master’s children obedient or afraid.

January 7. N.’s sister, who is so in love with her bridegroom that she tries to arrange it so as to speak with each visitor separately, since in face of the individual one can better express and repeat oneself about one’s love.

As if by magic (for neither outer nor inner circumstances, which now are more favorable than they have been for a year, hindered me) I was kept, during the whole free day, it is a Sunday, from writing. – Some new insights into the creature of misfortune that I am have dawned on me consolingly.

12 January. I have not written down much about myself in these days, partly from laziness (I now sleep so much and so soundly by day, I have a greater weight during sleep), partly, however, also from fear of betraying my self-knowledge. This fear is justified, for a self-knowledge might be definitively fixed by being written down only if this could happen in the greatest completeness, right into all incidental consequences, as well as with complete truthfulness. For if this does not happen – and I am in any case not capable of it –, then what is written down, according to its own intention and with the superior power of what is fixed, replaces what is merely felt in general only in such a way that the right feeling disappears, while the worthlessness of what has been noted is recognized too late.

A few days ago Leonie Frippon, cabaret performer, “Stadt Wien.” Coiffure a bound-up heap of curls. Bad bodice, very old dress, but very pretty with tragic movements, efforts of the eyelids, sallies of the long legs, well-understood stretching of the arms along the body. Significance of the stiff neck at ambiguous passages. Sung: Button Collection in the Louvre.

Schiller, drawn by Schadow in 1804 in Berlin, where he had been greatly honored. More firmly than with this nose one cannot grasp a face. The nasal septum is drawn down a little as a result of the habit of plucking at the nose while working. A friendly, somewhat hollow-cheeked man, whom the shaved face has probably made look senile.

January 14. Beradt’s novel Married Couples. Much bad Jewishness. A sudden monotonous teasing appearance by the author, for example, everyone was merry, but there was one there who was not merry. Or: there comes a Mr. Stern (whom we already know down into his novel-bones). In Hamsun too there is something similar, but there it is as natural as the knots in wood, here, however, it drips into the action like a fashionable medicine onto sugar. — Odd turns of phrase are held fast to without reason, for example: he was concerned with her hair, concerned and again concerned. — Individual people are, without being brought into a new light, well brought out, so well that even, in stretches, faults do no harm. Secondary figures mostly hopeless.

January 17. Max read me the first act of Farewell to Youth. How can I, as I am today, get near this; for a year I would have to search before I found a true feeling in myself, and am I, in the coffeehouse late in the evening, plagued by the stray winds of an in spite of everything bad digestion, somehow entitled, before so great a work, to be allowed to remain sitting in my chair.

January 19. I shall, since I seem to be finished from the ground up, in the last year I have not woken up for more than five minutes at a time, every day either have to wish myself away from the earth or else, without being allowed to see in this even the most moderate hope, have to begin again from the beginning as a little child. In this I shall have it easier outwardly than then. For in those times I still scarcely strove, with a faint intimation, toward a representation that would be connected word for word with my life, that I would draw to my breast and that would tear me away from my place. With what misery, though indeed incomparable with the present misery, did I begin! What cold pursued me for days out of what had been written! How great was the danger and how little interruptedly did it work, that I did not feel that cold at all, which of course did not make my misfortune as a whole much smaller.

Once I had a novel in mind, in which two brothers fought against each other, of whom one went to America, while the other remained in a European prison. I only began here and there to write lines, for it tired me at once. Thus once, on a Sunday afternoon, when we were visiting the grandparents and had eaten up a bread, always customary there, especially soft, spread with butter, I wrote down something about my prison. It is quite possible that for the most part I did it out of vanity and, by shifting the paper on the tablecloth, tapping with the pencil, looking around in the circle under the lamp, wanted to entice someone to take what had been written away from me, to look at it and to admire me. In the few lines the corridor of the prison was described in the main, above all its stillness and cold; about the brother who remained behind a pitying word was also said, because he was the good brother. Perhaps I had a momentary feeling for the worthlessness of my description, only before that afternoon I had never paid much attention to such feelings, when I sat among the relatives to whom I was accustomed (my timidity was so great that in the accustomed it already made me half happy), around the round table in the familiar room, and could not forget that I was young and, out of this present undisturbedness, called to great things. An uncle, who liked to ridicule, at last took the sheet from me, which I held only weakly, looked at it briefly, handed it back to me, even without laughing, and said only to the others, who followed him with their eyes, “the usual stuff,” to me he said nothing. I did indeed remain sitting and bent as before over my thus unusable sheet, but out of the company I had in fact been driven with a thrust, the judgment of the uncle repeated itself in me with already almost real significance, and I received, even within the family feeling, a glimpse into the cold space of our world, which I would have to warm with a fire that I first wanted to seek.

February 19. When today I wanted to get out of bed, I simply collapsed. This has a very simple reason, I am completely overworked. Not by the office, but by my other work. The office has only in this respect an innocent share in it, that, if I did not have to go there, I could quietly live for my work and would not have to spend these six hours daily there, which especially Friday and Saturday, because I was full of my own things, tormented me so that you cannot imagine it. In the end, I know that well enough, this is only chatter, I am guilty, and the office has against me the clearest and most justified claims. Only it is precisely for me a terrible double life, from which there is probably only madness as a way out. I write this in good morning light and would certainly not write it if it were not so true and if I did not love you as a son.

Besides, tomorrow I shall certainly be quite collected again and come to the office, where the first thing I shall hear will be that you want to have me out of your department.

February 19. The particular kind of my inspiration, in which I, happiest and unhappiest, now at two o’clock at night go to sleep (it will perhaps, if I only endure the thought of it, remain, for it is higher than all earlier ones), is this, that I can do everything, not only with a view to a particular work. If I write down a sentence at random, for example: “He looked out of the window,” then it is already perfect.

“Will you stay here much longer?” I asked. At the sudden speaking some saliva flew from my mouth as a bad omen.

“Does it disturb you? If it disturbs you or perhaps keeps you from going up, I shall go at once, otherwise, however, I would still like to stay, because I am tired.

Finally, however, he could also be satisfied and become ever more satisfied, the more exactly I recognized him. For he evidently recognized me still more exactly all the time and could surely put me, with all my recognitions, in his pocket. How else was it to be explained, then, that I still remained in the street, as if before me there were no house, but fire. When one is invited into a company, one simply enters the house, climbs the stairs and scarcely notices it, so much is one in one’s thoughts. Only so does one act rightly toward oneself and toward the company. The last paragraph was crossed out by Kafka.

20 February. Mella Mars in the ›Lucerna‹. A witty tragedienne, who in a certain sense appears on a reversed stage as tragediennes sometimes show themselves behind the scenes. On appearing she has a tired, admittedly also flat empty old face, as this is a natural initial impulse for all conscious actors. She speaks very sharply, her movements are so too, beginning with the thumb bent back, which seems to have hard tendons instead of bones. Particular transformability of her nose through the changing lights and hollows of the muscles playing all around. In spite of the eternal flashes of her movements and words she points delicately.

Small towns also have small surroundings for the walker.

The young, pure, well-dressed boys beside me in the promenoirPromenoir. A recollection of the Paris journey in the previous year (1910). reminded me of my youth and therefore made an unappetizing impression on me.

Kleist’s youthful letters, twenty-two years old. Gives up the soldier’s estate. At home they ask: So which bread-and-butter science, for that was held to be a matter of course. You have the choice between jurisprudence and cameral science. But do you also have connections at court? “At first, somewhat embarrassed, I said no, but thereupon explained all the more proudly that, even if I did have connections, according to my present ideas I would have to be ashamed of counting on them. They smiled, I felt that I had been too hasty. Such truths one must beware of uttering.”

21 February. My life here is such as if I were quite certain of a second life, just as, for example, I got over the unsuccessful stay in Paris in view of the fact that I shall strive to get there again soon. Along with this the sight of the sharply separated patches of light and shadow on the pavement of the alley.

How far away from me, for example, are the muscles of the arms.

Marc Henry-Delvard. The tragic feeling produced in the spectator by the empty hall favors the effect of serious songs, harms the merry ones. – Henry delivers a prologue, meanwhile Delvard, behind a curtain which, what she does not know, is translucent, arranges her hair. – W., the organizer, seems, at poorly attended events, to wear his Assyrian beard, which otherwise is deep black, gray-flecked. – Good, to let oneself be blown upon by such a temperament, that lasts for twenty-four hours, no, not so long. – Much expenditure of clothes, Breton costumes, the lowest petticoat is the longest, so that one can count the wealth from a distance. – At first Delvard accompanies, because they wanted to save an accompanist, in a wide low-cut green dress and freezes. – Paris street cries. Newspaper boys are blown away. – Someone addresses me; before I draw breath, I am dismissed. – Delvard is ridiculous, she has the smile of old maids, an old maid of the German cabaret. With a red shawl, which she fetches for herself behind the curtain, she makes revolution. Poems by Dauthendey with the same tough, not-to-be-chopped-up voice. Only the way she sat at first, womanly, at the piano, was dear. At the song “à Batignolles” I felt Paris in my throat. Batignolles is supposed to be pensioner-like, even its Apaches. Bruant has made every quarter its song.

Oskar M., an older student – if one looked at him close up, one was frightened by his eyes – stopped on a winter afternoon in the middle of the snowfall on an empty square, in his winter clothes with the winter overcoat over them, a shawl around his neck and a fur cap on his head. He blinked his eyes with thinking. So much had he abandoned himself in thought that once he took off the cap and with its curly fur stroked it over his face. At last he seemed to have come to a conclusion and turned, with a dance-like turn, toward the way home.

When he opened the door of his parents’ sitting room, he saw his father, a clean-shaven man with a heavy fleshy face, turned toward the door, sitting at an empty table. “At last,” he said, scarcely had Oskar set foot in the room, “stay, I beg you, by the door, for I have such a rage against you that I am not sure of myself.”

“But Father,” said Oskar, and only as he spoke noticed how he had been running.

“Quiet,” cried the father and stood up, thereby covering a window. “Quiet, I command. And your ‘buts’ you keep to yourself, do you understand.” At this he took the table with both hands and carried it a step nearer Oskar. “Your dissolute life I simply cannot endure any longer. I am an old man. In you I thought I had a comfort for old age, whereas you are worse for me than all my illnesses. Fie on such a son, who through laziness, wastefulness, malice and (why should I not tell you openly) stupidity drives his old father into the grave.” Here the father fell silent, but moved his face as if he were still speaking.

“Dear Father,” said Oskar and went cautiously toward the table, “calm yourself, everything will be well. Today I have had an idea that will make me an active man, just as you could wish.”

“How is that?” asked the father and looked into a corner of the room.

“Only trust me, at supper I shall explain everything to you. In my inner self I was always a good son, only that I could not show it outwardly too embittered me so much that I rather annoyed you, if I could not after all give you pleasure. But now let me go walking a little longer, so that my thoughts may develop more clearly.

The father, who at first, becoming attentive, had seated himself on the edge of the table, stood up. “I do not believe that what you have just said has much sense, I take it rather for chatter. But after all you are my son. — Come in good time, we shall have supper at home, and you can then present your matter.”

“This small confidence is enough for me, for it I am grateful from my heart. But is it then not already to be seen in my looks that I am wholly occupied with a serious matter.”

“For the present I see nothing,” said the father. “But it may also be my fault, for I have got out of the habit of looking at you at all.” At the same time he made one aware, as was his habit, by regular tapping on the tabletop, of how time was passing. “The main thing, however, is that I no longer have any confidence in you at all, Oskar. If I once shout at you — when you came, I did shout at you, did I not? — then I do not do it in the hope that it might improve you, I do it only in thought of your poor good mother, who now perhaps does not yet feel any immediate suffering over you, but already, through the exertion of warding off such suffering, for she believes she is somehow helping you by doing so, is slowly going to ruin. But after all these are things that you know very well, and I would, already out of consideration for myself, not have recalled them again, if you had not provoked me to it by your promises.

During the last words the maid came in, to look after the fire in the stove. Hardly had she left the room when Oskar cried out: “But Father! I would not have expected that. If I had had only a small idea, let us say, an idea for my dissertation, which after all has already been lying in my box for ten years and needs ideas like salt, then it is possible, even if not probable, that I, as happened today, would have run home from the walk and said: ‘Father, fortunately I have this and this idea.’ If, upon that, with your venerable voice you had said the reproaches from before into my face, then my idea would simply have been blown away, and I would immediately have had to march off with some excuse or without one. Now, on the other hand! Everything you say against me helps my ideas, they do not stop, growing stronger they fill my head. I shall go, because only in being alone can I bring order into them.” He swallowed at his breath in the warm room.

“It may of course also be some piece of villainy that you have in your head,” said the father with great eyes, “then I certainly believe that it holds you fast. But if something capable has strayed into you, it runs away from you overnight. I know you.”

Oskar turned his head, as if he were being held by the throat. “Leave me now. You are boring into me unnecessarily. The mere possibility that you can correctly predict my end should truly not entice you to disturb me in my good deliberation. Perhaps my past gives you the right to do so, but you should not make use of it.”

“There you see best how great your uncertainty must be, if it compels you to speak against me like that.

Nothing compels me,” said Oskar, and twitched in the nape of his neck. He also stepped quite close up to the table, so that one no longer knew to whom he belonged. “What I said, I said in reverence and even out of love for you, as you will later also see, for in my decisions consideration for you and Mama has the greatest share.”

“For that I must thank you already now,” said the father, “since it is indeed very improbable that your mother and I, at the right moment, will still be capable of doing so.”

“Please, Father, let the future still sleep, as it deserves. For if one wakes it prematurely, one then gets a sleepy present. But that your son must be the first to tell you that! Besides, I did not yet want to convince you, but only to report the news to you. And that at least, as you yourself must admit, I have succeeded in doing.”

“Now, Oskar, only one thing really still surprises me: why you have not already come to me more often with such a thing as today. It corresponds so much to your previous nature. No, in fact, I am in earnest.”

“Yes, would you then have thrashed me instead of listening to me? I ran here, God knows, in order quickly to give you pleasure. But I can reveal nothing to you so long as my plan is not completely finished. Why then do you punish me for my good intention and want explanations from me which now could still harm the execution of my plan?”

“Be silent, I do not want to know anything at all. But I must answer you very quickly, because you are withdrawing toward the door and evidently have something very urgent in mind: my first fury you have calmed with your little trick, only now I feel even sadder than before and therefore I ask you—if you insist on it, I can also fold my hands—at least say nothing to Mother about your ideas. Let it be enough with me.

That surely is not my father, who speaks to me like that,” cried Oskar, who had already laid his arm on the door handle. “Since noon something has happened with you, or you are a strange man whom I am now meeting for the first time in my father’s room. My real father” — Oskar was silent for a moment with open mouth — “he would surely have had to embrace me, he would have called Mother in. What is it with you, Father?”

“You would do better to have supper with your real father, I think. It would go more merrily.”

“He will come yet. In the end he cannot stay away. And Mother must be there. And Franz, whom I am fetching now. Everyone.” Thereupon Oskar pressed with his shoulder against the door, which opened easily, as if he had resolved to force it in.

Having arrived at Franz’s apartment, he bent toward the little landlady, with the words: “The engineer is asleep, I know, that does not matter,” and without concerning himself with the woman, who out of dissatisfaction with the visit was walking uselessly up and down in the anteroom, he opened the glass door, which, as if it had been grasped at a sensitive spot, trembled in his hand, and called, unconcerned with the inside of the room, which he still scarcely saw: “Franz, get up. I need your expert advice. But here in the room I cannot stand it, we must go for a little walk, you must also have supper with us. So quickly.”

“Very gladly,” said the engineer from his leather sofa, “but what first? Get up, have supper, go for a walk, give advice? I will also have missed some of it.”

“Above all don’t make jokes, Franz. That is the most important thing, that I forgot.”

“I’ll do you that favor at once. But getting up! — I would sooner have supper twice for you than get up once.”

“So now up! No contradiction.” Oskar seized the weak man by the front of his coat and set him up.

You are savage, you know. All respect. Have I ever torn you from the sofa like that?” He wiped his closed eyes with both little fingers.

“But Franz,” said Oskar with a distorted face, “get dressed now. I am surely no fool, that I would have woken you without reason.”

“Just as surely I too was not sleeping without reason. I had night duty yesterday, then today I have already been deprived of my midday sleep, also on your account—”

“Oh nonsense, it annoys me already how little consideration you show for me. It is not the first time. Of course, you are a free student and can do what you like. Not everyone is so fortunate. One must have some consideration, damn it! I am indeed your friend, but for that reason they have not yet taken my profession away from me.” He showed this by shaking his flat hands to and fro.

“But must I not, after your present mouth-work, believe that you have slept more than enough?” said Oskar, who had pulled himself up onto a bedpost, from where he looked at the engineer as though he already had somewhat more time than before.

“So what do you actually want from me? or better said, why did you wake me?” asked the engineer and rubbed hard the neck under his goatee, in that closer relation which one has to one’s body after sleep.

“What I want from you,” said Oskar softly and gave the bed a shove with his heel. “Very little. I already told you from the anteroom: that you are to get dressed.”

“If by that, Oskar, you want to indicate that your news interests me very little, then you are quite right.

That is indeed good, in that way the fire into which she will put you will go entirely on her own account, without our friendship having interfered. The information will also be clearer. I need clear information, keep that before your eyes. But if perhaps you are looking for collar and tie, they are lying there on the armchair.”

“Thank you,” said the engineer and began to fasten collar and tie, “one can rely on you after all.”

26 March. Theosophical lectures of Dr. Rudolf Steiner, Berlin. Rhetorical effect: Comfortable discussion of the objections of the opponents, the listener marvels at this strong opposition, the listener falls into anxiety, complete immersion in these objections, as if there were nothing else, the listener now considers a refutation altogether impossible and is more than satisfied with a fleeting description of the possibility of defense. This rhetorical effect corresponds, moreover, to the prescription of the devotional mood. – Continual looking at the surface of the held-out hand. – Omission of the final point. In general the spoken sentence, with its large initial capital letter, begins with the speaker, bends in its course, as far as it can, out toward the listeners and returns with the final point to the speaker. But if the point is omitted, then the sentence, no longer held, blows directly, with its whole breath, upon the listener.

We are now almost accustomed, in Western European narratives, as soon as they want only to include a few groups of Jews, to seek and to find, under or over the representation, at once also the solution of the Jewish question. In the JewessesMy novel, published in the year 1911. There are three drafts of this critique, similar to one another. however, such a solution is not shown, indeed not even surmised, for precisely those persons who occupy themselves with such questions stand, in the narrative, farther away from the center, there where the events already turn more rapidly, so that we can still observe them exactly, but no longer find an opportunity to receive from them any calm information about their efforts. Quickly resolved, we recognize in this a defect of the narrative and feel ourselves all the more entitled to such an objection, as today, since the existence of Zionism, the possible solutions are arranged so clearly around the Jewish problem that the writer, in the end, would have had to take only a few steps in order to find the possible solution suited to his narrative.

This defect, however, springs also from another. The Jewesses lack the non-Jewish spectators, the respected oppositional people, who in other narratives lure out the Jewish element, so that it advances against them in astonishment, doubt, envy, terror, and finally, finally is put into self-confidence, in any case, however, only in face of them can straighten itself up to its full length. That is exactly what we demand, we recognize no other resolution of masses of Jews. Nor do we appeal to this feeling only in this case, it is, in one direction at least, general. Thus on a footpath in Italy the twitching-up of the lizards before our steps delights us exceedingly, we would like continually to bend down, but if we see them at a dealer’s crawling over one another by the hundreds in the great bottles in which one otherwise is accustomed to pickle cucumbers, then we do not know how to arrange ourselves.

Both defects combine into a third. The ‘Jewesses’ can do without that foremost youth who otherwise, within his story, tears the best ones to himself and leads them, in a beautiful radial direction, to the boundaries of the Jewish circle. This precisely will not go into us, that the story can do without this youth, here we more suspect an error than see it.

28 March. Painter P.-Karlin, his wife, two broad large front teeth above, which bring the large, rather flat face to a point, Mrs. Hofrat B., mother of the composer, whose strong bone-structure age thrusts forward so much that at least while sitting she looks like a man.

Dr. Steiner is so much taken up by his absent pupils. ‘How does one attain knowledge of the higher worlds?’ is the title of a book by Rudolf Steiner. – During the lecture the dead press themselves so much upon him. Thirst for knowledge? But have they actually need of it? Evidently yes. – Sleeps two hours. Since once the electric light was cut off for him, he always has a candle with him. – He stood very near to Christ. – In Munich he staged his play (there you can study it for a year and do not understand it), he designed the costumes, wrote the music. – He instructed a chemist. – Löwy Simon, soap-dealer in Paris, Quai Moncey, received from him the best business advice. He translated his works into French. The Hofrätin therefore had written in her notebook “How does one attain the knowledge of higher worlds? At S. Löwy in Paris.

In the Vienna lodge there is a Theosophist, sixty-five years old, enormously strong, formerly a great drinker with a thick head, who continually believes and continually has doubts. It is said to have been very funny how once, at a congress in Budapest, at a supper on the Blocksberg on a moonlit evening, when unexpectedly Dr. Steiner came into the company, he hid himself in fright, with his little mug, behind a beer-barrel (although Dr. Steiner would not have been angry about it).

He is perhaps not the greatest present-day spiritual researcher, but he alone has received the task of uniting Theosophy with science. Therefore he also knows everything. – Into his native village there once came a botanist, a great occult master. He enlightened him. – That I shall seek out Dr. Steiner was interpreted for me by the lady as beginning recollection. – The lady’s doctor, when the beginnings of an influenza showed themselves in her, asked Dr. Steiner for a remedy, prescribed this to the lady and with it made her well at once. – A Frenchwoman took leave of him with “Au revoir.” He shook his hand behind her. After two months she died. Another similar Munich case. – A Munich doctor heals with colors which Dr. Steiner determines. He also sends sick people into the Pinakothek with the prescription to concentrate for half an hour or longer before a particular picture.

Atlantean world-destruction, Lemurian destruction and now the one through egoism. – We live in a decisive time. Dr. Steiner’s attempt will succeed, if only the Ahrimanic forces do not gain the upper hand. – He eats two liters of almond milk and fruits that grow in the heights. – He associates with his absent pupils by means of thought-forms which he sends out to them, without, after their production, occupying himself further with them. They soon wear themselves out, however, and he must produce them again.

A woman is already waiting (upstairs on the second floor of the Viktoria Hotel in Jungmannstraße), but urgently asks me to go in before her. We wait. The secretary comes and puts us off. Through an opening in the corridor I see him. Immediately afterward he comes toward us with half-outspread arms. The woman explains that I had been there first. I now go behind him, as he leads me into his room. His black frock coat, on lecture evenings as if polished with wax (not polished, but shining only through its pure blackness), is now in daylight (three o’clock in the afternoon), especially on the back and shoulders, dusty and even spotted.

In his room I try to show my humility, which I cannot feel, by looking for a ridiculous place for my hat, I lay it on a little wooden rack for lacing boots. Table in the middle, I sit with my face toward the window, he at the left side of the table. On the table papers with a few drawings, which recall those of the lectures on occult physiology. A little booklet, Annals for Natural Philosophy, covers a small heap of books, which seem to be lying about elsewhere too. Only one cannot look about, since he is always trying to hook one with his gaze. But if for once he does not do it, then one must watch for the return of the gaze. He begins with a few loose sentences: You are Dr. Kafka, are you not? Have you occupied yourself with theosophy for some time already?

But I press forward with my prepared address: I feel how a large part of my being strives toward theosophy, at the same time, however, I have the greatest fear of it. For I fear from it a new confusion, which would be very bad for me, since precisely my present unhappiness already consists only of confusion. This confusion lies in the following: My happiness, my abilities and every possibility of being of any use somehow have always lain in the literary. And here I have indeed experienced states (not many) which in my opinion come very near to the clairvoyant states described by you, Doctor, in which I lived wholly and entirely in every idea, but also fulfilled every idea, and in which I felt myself not only at my limits, but at the limits of the human altogether. Only the calm of enthusiasm, such as is probably peculiar to the clairvoyant, was nevertheless lacking in those states, even if not entirely. I conclude this from the fact that I did not write the best of my works in those states. – Now I cannot give myself completely to this literary thing, as it would have to be, and indeed cannot for various reasons. Apart from my family circumstances, I could not live from literature already as a result of the slow coming-into-being of my works and their particular character; furthermore my health and my character also prevent me from giving myself over to a life uncertain in the most favorable case. I have therefore become an official in a social insurance institution. Now these two professions can never tolerate one another and allow a common happiness. The smallest happiness in one becomes a great unhappiness in the second. If on one evening I have written something good, I burn the next day in the office and can bring nothing to completion. This back and forth grows ever worse. In the office I outwardly satisfy my duties, but not my inner duties, and that unfulfilled inner duty becomes an unhappiness that no longer moves out of me. And to these two endeavors, never to be reconciled, am I now to add theosophy as a third? Will it not disturb in both directions and itself be disturbed by both? Shall I, a man already now so unhappy, be able to carry the three to an end? I have come, Doctor, to ask you this, for I have a presentiment that, if you hold me capable of it, I can also really take it upon myself.

He listened extremely attentively, without apparently observing me in the least, wholly given over to my words. He nodded from time to time, which he seemingly regards as an aid to strong concentration. At the beginning a quiet cold troubled him, it ran from his nose, he kept working with the handkerchief deep into his nose, one finger at each nostril.

27 May. Today is your birthday, but I am not even sending you the usual book, for it would be only appearance; at bottom I am after all not even capable of giving you a book. Only because I so need, today for a moment, and be it only with this card, to be near you, I am writing, and have begun with the complaint only so that you may recognize me at once.

15 August. The time that has now passed, and in which I have not written a word, has for me been so important because in the swimming schools in Prague, Königssaal and Czernoschitz I have ceased to be ashamed of myself for my body. How late, now at twenty-eight years, I am catching up on my upbringing, a delayed start one would call it in a race. And the damage of such a misfortune does not perhaps consist in the fact that one does not win; this latter is after all only the still visible, clear, healthy kernel of the misfortune that goes on blurring, becoming boundless, which drives one, who was after all supposed to run around the circle, into the inside of the circle. Besides, I have also noticed many other things about myself in this time, to a small part also happy, and in the next days will try to write them down.

20 August. I have the unhappy belief that I have no time for the least good work, for I really have no time for a story, to spread myself out in all the directions of the world, as I would have to. But then again I believe that my journey will turn out better, that I shall apprehend better, if I have been loosened by a little writing, and so I try it again.

This text belongs to the story begun on page 15. At the sight of him I sensed the exertions which he had taken upon himself for my sake and which now, perhaps only because he was tired, gave him this certainty. Would not one more little exertion have sufficed and the deception would have succeeded, perhaps was succeeding even now. Was I resisting then? I did stand stubbornly here before the house, but just as stubbornly I hesitated to go up. Was I waiting until the guests came, to fetch me with song?

I have read about Dickens. Is it so difficult and can an outsider grasp it, that one lives a story in oneself from its beginning, from the distant point to the approaching locomotive of steel, coal and steam, but even now still does not leave it, but wants to be hunted by it and has time for that, thus is hunted by it and out of one’s own momentum runs from it, wherever it may thrust and wherever one lures it.

I cannot understand it and not even believe it. I live only here and there in a little word, in whose umlaut (above “stößt”) for example I lose my useless head for a moment. First and last letter are the beginning and end of my fishlike feeling.

24 August. To sit with acquaintances at a coffeehouse table in the open air and look at a woman at the next table, who has just come, breathes heavily under large breasts and with heated, brownishly shining face sits down. She inclines her head back, a strong down of beard becomes visible, she turns her eyes upward, almost as perhaps she sometimes looks at her husband, who now beside her is reading an illustrated newspaper. If only one could instill in him the conviction that beside one’s wife in the coffeehouse one may at most read a newspaper, but never a magazine. One moment brings her bodily fullness to her consciousness and she moves a little away from the table.

26 August. Tomorrow I am supposed to go to Italy. Now in the evening Father could not fall asleep from agitation, since he was wholly seized by anxiety about the business and by his illness awakened through it. On the heart a wet cloth, nausea, lack of air, sighing pacing to and fro. Mother in her fear finds new comfort. He had, after all, always been so energetic, he had got over everything and now —. I say that the misery with the business can surely last only another quarter-year, then everything must surely become good. He walks up and down sighing and shaking his head. It is clear that, seen from his side, his worries are not taken from him by us and not even eased, but even seen from our side not, even in our best will there still lies something of the so sad conviction that he must provide for his family ... Through his frequent yawning or his, moreover, not unappetizing picking of his nose, Father produces a small reassurance about his condition, scarcely coming to consciousness, although this, when he is healthy, he generally does not do. Ottla has confirmed it to me. — Poor Mother wants tomorrow to go plead with the landlord.

Between this and the preceding entry lies the Lugano-Paris-Erlenbach travel diary. The entry itself has a connection with the novel plan “Richard and Samuel” that arose on this journey (cf. “Stories and Short Prose”). It had already become a habit of the four friends Robert, Samuel, Max and Franz to use their short holidays every summer or autumn for a journey together. During the rest of the year their friendship consisted mostly in the fact that they liked, on one evening in the week, all four to come together, mostly at Samuel’s, who, as the most prosperous, had a larger room, to tell one another various things and with this to drink beer moderately. With the telling they were, at midnight, when they parted, never finished, since Robert was secretary of an association, Samuel employee of a commercial office, Max a civil servant and Franz an official in a banking business, so that almost everything which one of them had experienced during the week in his profession was not only unknown to the three others and had to be quickly told to them, but without more circumstantial explanation was also incomprehensible. Above all, however, the difference of these professions brought it about that each was compelled to set forth his profession to the others again and again, for the accounts were, by the others, because they were after all only weak human beings, not grasped thoroughly enough, but precisely for that reason and also out of good friendship were again and again demanded.

Stories about women, on the other hand, were seldom taken up, for even if Samuel, for his own person, would have found a taste for them, he took care not to demand that the conversation arrange itself according to his needs, whereby the old girl who fetched the beer often appeared to him as an admonition. But there was so much laughing on these evenings that Max, on the way home, said this eternal laughter was really regrettable, because by means of it one forgot all serious things, of which after all each person had just enough to bear. While one laughed, one thought, for seriousness there was still time enough. But that was not right, for seriousness naturally made greater demands on a person, and it was surely clear that in the company of friends one was also capable of satisfying greater demands than alone. One ought to laugh in the office, because there one brought nothing more about. This opinion was directed against Robert, who in his art association, which through him was rejuvenating itself, worked a great deal and at the same time in the old one noticed the most comical things, with which he entertained his friends.

Already when he began, the friends left their places, stood beside him or sat down on the table and laughed, especially Max and Franz, so self-forgetfully that Samuel carried all the glasses over onto a little side table. When one was tired from telling stories, Max sat down with suddenly renewed strength at the piano and played, while Robert and Samuel sat beside him on the little bench, Franz on the other hand, who understood nothing of music, looked through Samuel’s collection of picture postcards alone at the table or read the newspaper. When the evenings grew warmer and the window could already remain open, all four would come to the window and, their hands behind their backs, look down into the lane, without allowing themselves to be disturbed in their conversation by the traffic, weak though it admittedly was. Only here and there one went back to the table in order to take a sip, or pointed to the curled coiffures of two girls who were sitting below in front of their wine-room, or to the moon, which slightly surprised them, until finally Franz said it was cool, one ought to close the window.

In summer they sometimes met one another in a public garden, sat down at a table quite at the edge, where it was darker, drank to one another and in conversation, their heads together, scarcely noticed the distant brass band. Arm in arm, in equal step, they then went home through the grounds. The two at the edge twirled the little sticks or struck into the bushes, Robert called on them to sing, but then sang alone, well enough for four, the second in the middle felt himself, in doing so, especially securely taken up.

On such an evening Franz said and pressed his two neighbors closer to him, it would after all be so beautiful, being together, that he could not understand why they came together only once in the week, while it would surely be easy to arrange, if not more often, then at least twice weekly to see one another. All were in favor, even the fourth, who from outside had understood Franz’s soft speaking only indistinctly. Such a pleasure was surely worth the little trouble it would here and there cause one. It seemed to Franz as if, as punishment for speaking unasked for all, he were getting a hollow voice. But he did not desist. And if one of them really once could not come, then it was simply his loss, and he could be consoled next time, but did the others have to renounce one another on that account, were not three enough for one another and, if need be, even two? “Of course, of course,” they all said. At the edge Samuel detached himself and walked just in front of the three others, because in that way they were nearer to one another. But then again it did not seem so to him, and he preferred to link himself in.

Robert made a proposal: “We come together every week and learn Italian. To learn Italian we are resolved, for already last year in the little piece of Italy where we were, we saw that our Italian suffices only to ask the way, when we, remember, had lost our way between the vineyard walls of the Campagna. And even for that it sufficed only with the greatest exertion on the part of those questioned. Learn we must, then, if this year we want to go to Italy again. There is no help for it. And is it not best, then, to learn together?”

“No,” said Max, “we shall learn nothing together. I know that as definitely as I know that you, Samuel, are in favor of the common learning.

And how!” said Samuel. “We shall certainly learn very well together, I only always regret that we were not already together at school. Do you actually know that we have known one another for only two years?” He bent forward in order to see all three. They had slowed their pace and loosened their arms.

“But learned anything together we still have not,” said Franz. “I like it very well this way, after all. I do not want to learn anything at all. But if we have to learn Italian, then it is better, each one learns it for himself.”

“I don’t understand that,” said Samuel. “First you want us to come together every week, then again you don’t want it.”

“Oh come,” said Max, “me and Franz only want, after all, that our being together should not be disturbed by learning and our learning not by being together, nothing else.”

“There is, after all, not much time left either,” said Max, “now it is June and in September we want to travel.”

“That is precisely why I want us to learn together,” said Robert and made big eyes at the two who were against him. His neck in particular became supple when one contradicted him.

One thinks one is describing him correctly, but it is only approximate and is corrected by the diary.

It probably lies in the essence of friendship and follows it like a shadow — one will welcome it, another regret it, the third not notice it at all ...

26 September. The draftsman Kubin recommends as a purgative Regulin, a crushed alga, which swells up in the intestine, brings it to trembling, thus acts mechanically, in distinction from the unhealthy, chemical effect of other purgatives, which merely tear the excrement through, thus leave it hanging on the intestinal walls.

He met Hamsun at Langen’s. He (Hamsun) grins groundlessly. During the conversation, without having interrupted it, he lifted his foot onto his knee, took from the table a large pair of paper scissors and cut off all around the fringes of his trousers. Shabbily dressed, with some more valuable detail, for example necktie.

Stories of an artists’ boarding-house in Munich, where painters and veterinary doctors lived (the school of the latter was nearby) and where things were so run-down that the windows of the house opposite, from which there was a good view, were rented out. In order to satisfy these spectators, a boarder sometimes jumped onto the window-sill and, in the posture of an ape, spooned out his soup-pot.

A producer of false antiquities, who produced weathering by means of shot from a gun and who said of a table: Now we must drink coffee on it three more times, then it can be sent off to the Innsbruck Museum.

Kubin himself: very strong, but a somewhat uniformly animated face, with the same muscular tension he describes the most various things. Looks of different ages, heights, and strengths, according to whether he is sitting, standing up, has on only his suit or his overcoat.

27 September. Yesterday on Wenceslas Square encountered two girls, kept my gaze too long on one, while precisely the other, as appeared too late, was wearing a domestically soft, brown, wrinkled, wide coat, a little open in front, had a delicate neck and delicate nose, the hair was beautiful in a way already forgotten. – Old man with loosely hanging trousers on the Belvedere. He whistles; when I look at him, he stops; if I look away, he begins again; finally he whistles even when I look at him. – The beautiful large button, beautifully placed low on the sleeve of a girl’s dress. The dress also beautifully worn, hovering above American boots. How seldom does anything beautiful succeed for me, and for this unnoticed button and its unknowing seamstress it succeeds. – The storyteller on the way to the Belvedere, whose lively eyes, independently of the words of the moment, contentedly surveyed her story to its end. – Mighty half-turn of the neck of a strong girl.

29 September. Goethe’s diaries. A person who has no diary is in a false position toward a diary. If, for example, he reads in Goethe’s diaries: “11. 1. 1797. The whole day at home occupied with various arrangements,” then it seems to him that he himself has never yet done so little in one day.

Goethe’s travel observations different from those of today, because they are made from a post-chaise and develop more simply with the slow changes of the terrain and can much more easily be followed even by someone who does not know those regions. A calm, positively landscape-like thinking sets in. Since the region, undamaged in its native character, presents itself to the occupant of the carriage and since the country roads too cut through the land much more naturally than the railway lines, to which they perhaps stand in the same relation as rivers to canals, so there is no need, in the observer either, for any acts of violence, and he can be systematic without great effort. Observations of the instant there are therefore few, mostly only in interiors, where definite people at once surge up boundlessly before one’s eyes, for example Austrian officers in Heidelberg, whereas the passage about the men in Wiesenheim is nearer to the landscape, “they wear blue coats and white waistcoats decorated with woven flowers” (quoted from memory). Much written down about the Rhine Falls near Schaffhausen, in the midst of it in larger letters: “Excited ideas.

Cabaret Lucerna. Lucie König exhibits photographs with old hairstyles. Scraped-away face. Sometimes something succeeds for her with the nose lifted from below, with the arm held aloft and a turn of all the fingers. Washcloth-like face. – LongenLongen later wrote a biography of Jaroslav Hašek, the author of the book ›The Good Soldier Schwejk‹. – The Grünbaum mentioned in the same note is the well-known comedian. (Painter Pittermann) mimic jokes. An achievement which is evidently without pleasure, and yet cannot be thought so pleasureless, since after all then it could not be carried through every evening, especially since even at its invention it was so pleasureless that no sufficient scheme resulted, which would spare the sufficiently frequent entrance of the whole man. Pretty clown’s leap over an armchair away into the emptiness of the side wing. The whole thing recalls a performance in a private gathering, where, out of social need, one applauds a laborious, insignificant achievement especially strongly, in order, with regard to the minus of the achievement, through the plus of the applause to obtain something smooth, rounded off. Singer Vaschata. So bad that one loses oneself in the sight of him. But because he is a strong man, he nevertheless holds, with an animal force certainly coming to consciousness only in me, the attention of the audience halfway gathered.

Grünbaum works with the allegedly only apparent desolateness of his existence.

Odys, dancer. Stiff hips. Proper fleshlessness. Red knees suit only the dance ›Spring Mood‹.

30 September. The girl in the next room the day before yesterday (H. H.). I lay on the canapé and heard, on the edge of half-sleep, her voice. She seemed to me especially strongly dressed, not only in her clothes, but also in the whole next room, only her shaped, naked, round, strong, dark shoulder, which I had seen in the bath, held its own against her clothes. For a moment she seemed to me to steam and to fill the whole next room with her vapors. Then she stood in the bodice of ash-gray color, which below stood away from the body so far that one could sit down on it and thus in a certain sense ride.

Still Kubin: The habit, in any case, of repeating the other person’s last words in an approving tone, even if through one’s own speech spun onto them it turns out that one by no means agrees with the other person. Annoying. – In listening to his many stories one can forget what he is worth. Suddenly one is reminded of it and is frightened. There was talk of the fact that a place into which we wanted to go was dangerous; he said he would not go in there; I asked him whether he was timid, to which he answered, and moreover was still hooked into me: Naturally, I am young and still have much before me.

The whole evening he spoke often and, in my opinion, quite seriously of my and his constipation. Toward midnight, however, when I let my hand hang from the edge of the table, he saw a piece of my arm and cried: But you really are ill. From then on treated me much more indulgently and later also warded off the others, who wanted to urge me to go along into the B. too. When we had already said good-bye, he called to me once more from a distance: Regulin!

Tucholsky and Szafranski. The breathed Berlin dialect, in which the voice needs rest-pauses, which are formed by “nich.” The first a quite unified human being of twenty-one years. From the moderate and strong swinging of the walking stick, which lifts the shoulder youthfully, on to the considered pleasure in, and contempt for, his own literary works. Wants to become a defense counsel, sees only a few obstacles at the same time as the possibility of their removal: his bright voice, which after the masculine sound of the first half-hour talked through allegedly becomes girlish – doubts about his own capacity for the pose, which however he hopes for from greater experience of the world – finally fear of a transformation into the world-sorrowful, as he has noticed it in older Berlin Jews of his tendency, though for the time being he feels absolutely nothing of it. He will soon marry.

Szafranski, Bernhard’s pupil, while drawing and observing makes grimaces that stand in connection with what is drawn. Reminds me that I for my part have a strong capacity for transformation, which no one notices. How often I had to imitate Max. Yesterday evening on the way home I could, as a spectator, have confused myself with Tucholsky. The alien nature must then be in me as distinct and invisible as the hidden thing in a puzzle picture, in which one too would never find anything if one did not know that it is in there. In these transformations I should especially like to believe in a clouding-over of one’s own eyes.

October 1. Old-New Synagogue yesterday. Kol Nidre, introductory prayer on the eve of the Day of Atonement. Muted stock-exchange murmur. In the vestibule a box with the inscription: “Charitable gifts in secret appease displeasure.” Church-like interior. Three pious, evidently Eastern Jews. In socks. Bent over the prayer book, the prayer shawl drawn over the head, having become as small as possible. Two are weeping, moved only by the holiday? One perhaps has only sore eyes, to which he fleetingly applies the still-folded handkerchief, in order at once to hold his face close to the text again. Not really or chiefly is the word sung, but behind the word arabesques are drawn out of the word spun on hair-thin. The little boy who, without the slightest conception of the whole and without any possibility of orientation, the noise in his ears, pushes and is pushed along between the crowded people. The apparent clerk, who shakes himself rapidly while praying, which is to be understood only as an attempt at the strongest possible, even if perhaps unintelligible, emphasis of every word, the voice being spared in the process, which moreover in the noise could not achieve a clear great emphasis. The family of the brothel owner. In the Pinkas Synagogue I was taken hold of by Judaism incomparably more strongly.

The day before the day before yesterday. The one, a Jewess with a narrow face, better: which runs out into a narrow chin, but is shaken out into breadth by an extensively wavy coiffure. The three small doors that went from the interior of the building into the salon. The guests as in a guardroom on the stage. Drinks on the table are, after all, scarcely touched. The flat-faced one in the angular dress, which only far down in a hem begins to move. Some here dressed like the marionettes for children’s theatres, as they are sold at the Christmas market, that is to say pasted over with ruffles and gold and loosely sewn on, so that one can tear them off with one pull and so that they then fall apart in one’s fingers. The hostess, with the matte-blond hair, but drawn tight over undoubtedly disgusting underlayers, with the sharply descending nose, whose direction stands in some geometrical relation to the hanging breasts and the stiffly held belly, complains of headaches, which are caused by the fact that today, Saturday, there is such a great commotion and there is nothing to it.

On Kubin: The story by Hamsun is suspicious. Such stories one could tell by the thousands out of his works as things experienced.

On Goethe: “Excited ideas” are merely the ideas which the Rhine Falls excites. One sees that from a letter to Schiller. – The isolated momentary observation “castanet rhythm of the children in wooden shoes” has had such an effect, is so generally accepted, that it is unthinkable that anyone, even if he had never read this remark, could feel this observation as his own original idea.

2 October. Sleepless night. Already the third in a row. I fall asleep well, but after an hour I wake up, as if I had laid my head in a wrong hole. I am completely awake, have the feeling of not having slept at all, or only under a thin skin, have the work of falling asleep before me all over again and feel myself rejected by sleep. And from now on it remains so the whole night until about five, that though I do sleep, strong dreams soon at the same time keep me awake. Beside me I sleep formally, while I myself have to struggle about with dreams. Toward five the last trace of sleep is used up, I only dream, which is more exhausting than waking. In short, I spend the whole night in the state in which a healthy person finds himself for a little while before the actual falling asleep. When I awake, all the dreams are gathered around me, but I guard myself against thinking them through. Toward morning I sigh into the pillows, because for this night all hope is over. I think of those nights at whose end I was lifted out of deep sleep, and awoke as if I had been locked up in a nut.

A terrible apparition today in the night was a blind child, apparently the daughter of my Leitmeritz aunt, who incidentally has no daughter, but only sons, one of whom had once broken his foot. On the other hand there were connections between this child and Dr. M.’s daughter, who, as I saw recently, is on the way, from a pretty child, to become a fat, stiffly dressed little girl. This blind or weak-sighted child had both eyes covered by a pair of spectacles, the left, under the rather far-removed lens, was milky gray and protruded roundly, the other receded and was hidden by a close-fitting lens. In order that this lens should be optically correctly inserted, it was necessary, instead of the usual holder going back over the ear, to use a lever, whose head could not be fastened otherwise than to the cheekbone, so that from this lens a little rod went down to the cheek, there disappeared into the perforated flesh and ended at the bone, while a new little wire rod came out and went back over the ear.

I believe this sleeplessness comes only from the fact that I write. For however little and however badly I write, I am nevertheless made sensitive by these small shocks, feel, especially toward evening and still more in the morning, the wafting, the near possibility of great states tearing me open, which could make me capable of everything, and then in the general noise that is inside me and which I have no time to command, I get no rest. In the end this noise is only an oppressed, held-back harmony, which, released, would fill me entirely, indeed would even stretch me still into the distance and then still fill me. But now this condition causes me, besides weak hopes, only harm, since my being has not enough capacity to endure the present mixture; by day the visible world helps me, in the night it cuts me apart unhindered. In this connection I always think of Paris, in which, at the time of the siege and later until the Commune, the population of the northern and eastern suburbs, until then foreign to the Parisian, in the course of months, formally from hour to hour, through the connecting lanes, haltingly like clock hands, advanced into the interior of Paris.

My consolation is—and with it I now lie down—that I have not written for so long, that therefore this writing has not yet been able to arrange itself within my present circumstances, that this, however, with some manliness, must succeed at least provisionally.

Today I was so weak that I even told my chief the story of the child. — Now I remembered that the spectacles in the dream come from my mother, who in the evening sits beside me and, from under her pince-nez, during the card game, looks over at me not very pleasantly. Her pince-nez even has, which I do not remember having noticed before, the right lens nearer the eye than the left.

3 October. The same night, only I fell asleep still more heavily. While falling asleep a vertically running pain in the head above the root of the nose, as from a too sharply pressed fold in the forehead. In order to be as heavy as possible, which I consider good for falling asleep, I had crossed my arms and laid my hands on my shoulders, so that I lay there like a loaded soldier. Again it was the power of my dreams, which already radiate into waking before falling asleep, that would not let me sleep. The consciousness of my poetic abilities is in the evening and in the morning impossible to survey. I feel myself loosened down to the bottom of my being and can lift out of myself whatever I only wish. This luring forth of such powers, which one then does not allow to work, reminds me of my relation to B. Here too there are outpourings that are not released, but in the recoil must destroy themselves, only that here — that is the difference — it is a matter of more mysterious powers and of my ultimate.

On the Josefsplatz a large touring automobile with a family sitting close together drove past me. Behind the automobile, with the smell of benzine, a current of Paris air went over my face.

While dictating a longer report to a district authority in the office. At the close, which was supposed to rise to a pitch, I got stuck and could do nothing but look at Miss K. at the machine, who according to her habit became especially lively, moved her chair, coughed, tapped about on the table and in this way made the whole room attentive to my misfortune. The idea I was looking for now also acquires the value that it will make her quiet, and, the more valuable it becomes, the harder it is to find. At last I have the word “brandmark” and the sentence belonging to it, but still hold everything in my mouth with a feeling of disgust and shame, as if it were raw flesh, flesh cut out of me (such trouble it has cost me.) At last I say it, but retain the great terror that for a poetic work everything in me is ready and that such a work would be a heavenly dissolution and a real becoming-alive for me, while here in the office, for the sake of so miserable a piece of official business, I must rob a body capable of such happiness of a piece of its flesh.

4 October. I am restless and poisonous. Yesterday before falling asleep I had, in the upper left of my head, a flickering cool little flame. Above my left eye a tension has already established itself. If I think of it, it seems to me that I could not endure it in the bureau even if one told me that in a month I shall be free. And yet in the bureau I mostly do my duty, am quite calm when I can be sure of my chief’s satisfaction, and do not feel my condition as a terrible one. Yesterday evening, moreover, I deliberately made myself dull, went for a walk, read Dickens, was then somewhat healthier and had lost the strength for the sadness which I regarded as justified, even if it seemed to me also somewhat removed into the distance, from which I hoped for a better sleep. It was also a little deeper, but not enough, and often interrupted. I said to myself, as consolation, that although I had again suppressed the great movement that had been in me, nevertheless I did not want to give myself out of my hand, as formerly always after such times, but rather that I wanted to remain exactly conscious also of the aftereffects of that movement, which formerly I had never done. Perhaps in this way I could find a hidden steadfastness in myself.

Toward evening in the dark in my room on the sofa. Why does one need a longer time to recognize a color, but then, after the decisive bend of understanding, become rapidly more and more convinced of the color. If the light of the anteroom and that of the kitchen work upon the glass door from outside at the same time, then greenish or better, so as not to devalue the certain impression, green light pours down the panes almost completely. If the light in the anteroom is turned off and only the kitchen light remains, then the pane nearer the kitchen becomes deep blue, the other whitish blue, so whitish that the whole design on the frosted glass (stylized poppy heads, tendrils, various quadrangles and leaves) dissolves.

The lights and shadows thrown by the electric light in the street and on the bridge below onto the walls and the ceiling are disordered, in part spoiled, covering one another and difficult to check. For precisely at the installation of the electric arc lamps below and in the arrangement of this room no housewifely consideration was taken of how my room at this hour, seen from the sofa, without its own room lighting, would look.

The gleam thrown up to the ceiling by the electric tram passing below travels whitish, veil-like and mechanically halting, along one wall and the ceiling, broken in the edge. – The globe stands in the first fresh, full reflected shine of the street lighting on the linen cupboard, which above is greenishly cleanly overlit, has a point of brightness on its roundness and an appearance as if the shine were after all too strong for it, although the light passes over its smoothness and leaves it rather brownish, leather-apple-like. – The light from the anteroom produces a broad-surfaced gleam on the wall above the bed, which is bounded in a curved line from the head end of the bed, presses the bed down for the moment, broadens the dark bedposts, lifts the ceiling of the room above the bed.

5 October. For the first time in several days unrest again, even before this writing. Rage at my sister, who comes into the room and sits down at the table with a book. Waiting for the next small opportunity for the letting-loose of this rage. At last she takes a visiting card from the holder and pokes about with it between her teeth. With the rage driving off, of which only a sharp vapor in my head remains to me, and beginning relief and confidence, I begin to write.

Yesterday evening Café Savoy. Jewish company. It is a travelling troupe of East-Jewish actors, which from then on becomes significant for Kafka’s life and development. The troupe used a small, little-regarded café as a theatre hall. We two had already in 1910 (in May) seen similar performances by another troupe in the same café. – Mrs. K. “male impersonator.” In a kaftan, short black trousers, white stockings, a thin-woollen white shirt rising out of the black waistcoat, which is held at the front of the neck by a thread button and then turns over into a broad, loose, long-running collar. On her head, enclosing the woman’s hair, but otherwise necessary too and also worn by her husband, a dark brimless little cap, over it a large soft black hat with the brim bent high upward. – Actually I do not know what sort of persons these are whom she and her husband represent. If I wanted to explain them to someone to whom I do not want to admit my ignorance, I would see that I take them for community servants, for employees of the Temple, known idlers with whom the community has come to terms, spongers somehow preferred for religious reasons, people who, as a result of their separate position, are just quite close to the centre of community life, as a result of their useless watchful roaming know many songs, see precisely through the circumstances of all members of the community, but, as a result of their lack of relation to professional life, do not know how to put these pieces of knowledge to any use, people who are Jews in an especially pure form, because they live only in religion, but without effort, understanding, and lament in it. They seem to make a fool of everyone, laugh immediately after the murder of a noble Jew, sell themselves to an apostate, dance, their hands for delight at their cheek-hair, when the unmasked murderer poisons himself and calls upon God, and yet all this only because they are so feather-light, lie on the ground under every pressure, are sensitive, immediately weep with dry face (they weep themselves out in grimaces), but as soon as the pressure is past, cannot bring forth the least weight of their own, but at once must spring up into the air.

They would therefore, to a serious piece, as Lateiner’s Meschumed is, really have to cause much anxiety, since they are always, in their full size and often on tiptoe with both legs in the air, at the front of the stage and do not release the agitation of the piece, but cut it to pieces. Meschumed. The Baptized One (literally: The Destroyed One). – One will probably not be wrong in seeing in the two figures described here, who form a kind of chorus, the first sketch of the two “assistants” in the novel The Castle. But now the seriousness of the piece unwinds in such closed words, weighed even in the possible improvisation, stretched by a unified feeling, that, even when the action takes place only at the back of the stage, it always preserves its significance. Rather, here and there the two in the caftan are suppressed, which corresponds to their nature, and despite their outspread arms and snapping fingers one sees only, at the back, the murderer, who, the poison within him, his hand at his actually too wide collar, staggers toward the door.

The melodies are long, the body gladly entrusts itself to them. In consequence of their straight-running length they are best answered by the rocking of the hips, by outspread arms raised and lowered in quiet breath, by the approach of the palms to the temples and careful avoidance of contact. Recalls somewhat the Schlapak. Czech folk dance.

At some songs, at the address “Jewish Kinderlach,” at many a sight of this woman, who on the platform, because she is a Jewess, draws us listeners, because we are Jews, to herself, without desire or curiosity for Christians, a trembling passed over my cheeks. The government representative, who perhaps with the exception of a waiter and two maidservants standing to the left of the stage is the only Christian in the hall, is a pitiful person, afflicted with a facial tic, which especially in the left half of the face, and also tearing strongly into the right, contracts and releases the face with the almost considerate speed, I mean fugitive quality of the second hand, but also with its regularity. When it runs over the left eye, it almost extinguishes it. For this contraction new little fresh muscles have developed in the otherwise wholly ruined face.

The Talmudic melody of precise questions, adjurations or explanations: Into a tube the air rushes and takes the tube with it, in return a great screw, in the whole proud, in its bends humble, turns toward the one questioned out of small distant beginnings.

October 6. The two old men in front by the long table at the stage. The one supports himself with both arms on the table and has only his face, whose false swollen redness with an irregularly square, matted beard beneath it sadly conceals his age, turned upward to the right toward the stage, while the other, directly opposite the stage, holds his face, correctly dried out by age, free back from the table, on which he leans only with his left arm, and holds his right arm bent in the air, in order to enjoy better the melody, which his toe-tips follow and to which the short pipe in his right hand weakly yields. “Tateleben, do sing along,” the woman calls now to the first, now to the second, while bending a little and stretching her arms forward to drive them on.

The melodies are suited to catch every person who springs up and, without tearing, to encompass his whole enthusiasm, if one is not once and for all willing to believe that they give it to him. For especially the two in the caftan hurry toward singing, as if it stretched their body toward its most proper need, and the clapping together of the hands during the song evidently indicates the best well-being of the human being in the actor. – The innkeeper’s children in a corner remain with Frau K. on the stage in a childlike relation and sing along, the mouth between the lips curling upward full of the melody.

The play: Seidemann, a rich Jew, has, in an evident concentration of all his criminal instincts upon this goal, had himself baptized, already twenty years ago, and at that time, since she would not let herself be forced to baptism, poisoned his wife. Since then he has exerted himself to forget the jargon, which to be sure without intention sounds along underneath in his speech, especially at the beginning, so that the listeners may notice it and because the approaching events still leave time for it, and continually expresses a great disgust for everything Jewish. He has intended his daughter for the officer Dragomirow, while she, who loves her cousin, the young Edelmann, in a great scene, raising herself in an unusual stone posture, broken only at the waist, declares to her father that she holds firmly to Judaism, and ends a whole act with contemptuous laughter over the compulsion done to her. (The Christians of the play are: a good Polish servant of Seidemann’s, who later contributes to his unmasking, good above all because around Seidemann the opposites must be assembled, the officer, with whom the play, apart from the representation of his indebtedness, concerns itself little, because as a noble Christian he interests no one, just as little as a president of the court who appears later, and finally a court attendant, whose malice does not go beyond the requirement of his position and the merriment of the two caftan-people, although Max calls him a pogromist.) Dragomirow, however, for some reasons or other can marry only if his bills of exchange are redeemed, which the old Edelmann possesses, but which he, although he is on the point of departing for Palestine and although Seidemann wants to pay him for them in cash, does not give up. The daughter is proud toward the enamoured officer and boasts of her Judaism, although she is baptized, the officer does not know how to help himself and, his arms limp, his hands loosely intertwined below, looks to the father for help. The daughter flees to Edelmann, she wants to marry the beloved, even if for the present in secret, since a Jew according to secular law may not marry a Christian woman and she apparently cannot, without her father’s consent, go over to Judaism. The father comes there, sees that without cunning everything would be lost, and outwardly gives his blessing to this marriage. All forgive him, indeed begin to love him as if they had been in the wrong, even the old Edelmann and he especially, although he knows that Seidemann has poisoned his sister. (This gap has perhaps arisen through a shortening, but perhaps also through the fact that the play has been spread mainly orally from one troupe of actors to another.) Through this reconciliation Seidemann obtains above all Dragomirow’s bills of exchange, for “you know,” he says, “I do not want this Dragomirow to speak badly of the Jews,” and Edelmann gives them to him for nothing, then Seidemann calls him to the portière in the background, allegedly in order to show him something, and from behind stabs a knife through his dressing gown fatally into his back. (Between the reconciliation and the murder Seidemann had been absent from the stage for a while, in order to think out the plan and buy the knife.) By this he wants to bring the young Edelmann to the gallows, for suspicion must fall on him, and his daughter will be free for Dragomirow. He runs away, Edelmann lies behind the portière. The daughter enters with the bridal veil, on the arm of the young Edelmann, who has put on the prayer-shirt. The father is, as they see, unfortunately not yet there. Seidemann comes and seems happy at the sight of the bridal pair. Then a man appears, perhaps Dragomirow himself, perhaps merely an actor and actually a detective unknown to us, and declares that he must carry out a house search, since “in this house one is not sure of one’s life.” Seidemann: “Children, do not worry, this is of course a mistake, naturally. Everything will be cleared up.” Edelmann’s corpse is found, the young Edelmann torn from his beloved and arrested. For a whole act Seidemann, with great patience and very well emphasized little interposed remarks (Yes, yes, quite good. But that is wrong. Yes, that is already better. Certainly, certainly), instructs the two in caftans how before the court they are to testify to the alleged enmity of many years between the old and the young Edelmann. They get going only with difficulty, there are many misunderstandings, thus at an improvised rehearsal of the court scene they step forward and declare that Seidemann has instructed them to represent the matter in the following way — until at last they live themselves so deeply into that enmity that they are even — Seidemann can no longer stop them — in a position to show how the murder itself took place and the man stabs down the woman with the help of a Kipfel. That is of course again more than will be necessary. Nevertheless Seidemann is sufficiently satisfied with the two and with their help hopes for a good outcome of the trial. Here, for the believing listener, without its being in any way expressed, because it is self-evident, God Himself intervenes in place of the retreating writer and strikes the evil man with blindness.

In the last act, as president of the court, the eternal Dragomirow actor is sitting there again (in this too the contempt for the Christian element shows itself, a Jewish actor can perfectly well play three Christian roles, and if he plays them badly, that does not matter either) and beside him as defense counsel, with great expenditure of hair and mustache, soon recognized, Seidemann’s daughter. One does indeed recognize her soon, but with regard to Dragomirow one takes her for a long time for an actor-substitute, until toward the middle of the act one sees that she has disguised herself in order to save her beloved. The two in caftans are each to give testimony separately, but this is very difficult for them, since they have rehearsed it as a pair. Nor do they understand the High German of the president, whom, however, the defense counsel, when it gets too bad, helps out, just as in other respects too he has to prompt him. Then comes Seidemann, who earlier has already tried to direct the men in caftans by plucking at their clothes, and by his fluent, definite speech, by his sensible bearing, by correct address to the president of the court, makes, in comparison with the earlier witnesses, a good impression, which is in a terrible contrast to what we know of him. His statement is fairly empty of content, unfortunately he knows very little about the whole affair. But now, in the last witness, the servant, there comes Seidemann’s real accuser, not quite conscious of it himself. He has observed Seidemann’s purchase of the knife, he knows that Seidemann was at Edelmann’s at the decisive time, he knows finally that Seidemann hated the Jews and especially Edelmann and wanted his bills. The two in caftans jump up and are happy to be able to corroborate all this. Seidemann defends himself as a somewhat confused man of honor. Then the talk turns to his daughter. Where is she? At home, of course, and gives him right. No, that she does not do, the defense counsel maintains, and wants to prove it, turns to the wall, takes off the wig, and turns toward the horrified Seidemann as his daughter. Punishingly the pure white of the upper lip looks out, when she also removes the mustache. Seidemann has taken poison in order to escape earthly justice, confesses his misdeeds, but scarcely any longer to men, rather to the Jewish God, to whom he now professes himself. Meanwhile the piano player has struck up a melody, the two in caftans feel themselves seized by it and must start dancing. In the background stands the united bridal couple, they sing along with the melody, especially the serious bridegroom, according to old Temple custom.

First appearance of the two in caftans. They come with collection boxes for temple purposes into Seidemann’s room, look about them, feel uncomfortable, look at one another. Run their hands along the doorposts, find no mezuzahLiterally: doorpost. On the apartment door of every orthodox Jew there is affixed a case with a parchment roll inside it, which contains certain biblical passages. . Not at the other doors either. They do not want to believe it and jump up at various doors and strike, as when catching flies, rising and falling, again and again quite at the top of the doorposts, so that it smacks. Unfortunately all in vain. Up to now they have not spoken a word.

Similarity between Frau K. and last year’s Frau W. Frau K. has perhaps a by a trifle weaker and more monotonous temperament, but in return she is prettier and more respectable. W. had the continual joke of bumping her fellow players with her big backside. Moreover she had a worse singer beside her and was quite new to us.

“Male impersonator” is really a false designation. Through the fact that she is stuck in her caftan, her body is quite forgotten. Only through her shoulder-shrugging and back-turning, which happens as if under flea bites, does she remind one of her body. The sleeves must, although they are short, every moment be pulled up a little, from which the spectator promises himself, for the woman who has so much to sing out and also to explain in Talmudic fashion, a great relief and himself watches that it happens.

Desire to see a large Yiddish theater, since the performance may after all be suffering from the small cast and inexact rehearsal. Also the desire to know Yiddish literature, to which apparently an uninterrupted national fighting position is assigned, one that determines every work. A position, then, which no literature, not even that of an oppressed people, has in this thoroughgoing way. Perhaps it happens among other peoples in times of struggle that the national, combative literature rises up and other, more remote works, through the enthusiasm of the listeners, receive a national semblance in this sense, as for example The Bartered Bride, but here only the works of the first kind, and indeed permanently, seem to exist.

The sight of the simple stage, which awaits the actors as mutely as we do. Since, with its three walls, the armchair and the table, it will have to suffice for all occurrences, we expect nothing from it, expect rather, with all our strength, the actors, and are therefore irresistibly drawn by the singing behind the empty walls with which the performance is introduced.

9 October. If I should reach my fortieth year, then I shall probably marry an old maid with protruding upper teeth, somewhat bared by the upper lip. The upper middle teeth of Fräulein K., who has been in Paris and London, are shifted against each other, like legs that one hastily crosses at the knees. But I shall hardly become forty years old, against it speaks, for example, the tension that often lays itself over the left half of my skull, that feels like an inner leprosy and that, when I disregard the unpleasantnesses and only want to observe, makes on me the same impression as the sight of the skull cross-sections in school textbooks or as an almost painless dissection on the living body, where the knife, a little cooling, cautious, often stopping and returning, sometimes lying quietly, further divides leaf-thin coverings quite close to working parts of the brain.

Dream of tonight, which I myself, even early this morning, did not yet consider beautiful, apart from a small comic scene consisting of two counter-remarks, which had that monstrous dream-delight as its consequence, but which I have forgotten.

I went—whether Max was with me right at the beginning, I do not know—through a long row of houses at the height of the first to second floor, just as one goes in corridor trains from one carriage to another. I went very quickly, perhaps also because sometimes the house was so fragile that for that reason alone one hurried. The doors between the houses did not strike me at all, it was simply a gigantic suite of rooms, and yet not only the difference of the individual dwellings, but also of the houses, could be recognized. They were perhaps nothing but rooms with beds, through which I came. There has remained in my memory a typical bed, standing sideways to my left against the dark or dirty, perhaps attic-like sloping wall, having a low structure of bed-linen, and whose cover, actually only a coarse sheet, trodden together by the feet of the person who has slept here, hangs down in one corner. I felt ashamed, at a time when many people were still lying in the beds, to go through their rooms, therefore went on tiptoe with long steps, through which I somehow hoped to show that I was passing through only under compulsion, spared everything as much as possible and stepped lightly, that my passing-through virtually did not count at all. For that reason I also never turned my head in the same room and saw only either what lay to the right toward the street or what lay to the left toward the rear wall.

The row of apartments was often interrupted by brothels, through which, however, although I apparently took this way for their sake, I went particularly quickly, so that I remembered nothing but their existence. But the last room of all the apartments was again a brothel, and here I stayed. The wall opposite the door through which I entered, that is, the last wall of the row of houses, was either of glass or altogether broken through, and if I had gone on I would have fallen down. It is even more probable that it was broken through, for there lay, toward the edge of the floor, the prostitutes. Two were clear to me, on the ground, one of them had her head hanging a little out over the edge, down into the free air. On the left there was a solid wall, whereas the wall on the right was not complete, one saw down into the courtyard, even if not down to its bottom, and a dilapidated gray staircase led down in several sections. Judging by the light in the room, the ceiling was as in the other rooms.

I had principally to do with the prostitute whose head hung down, Max with the one lying to the left beside her. I felt her legs and then remained at it, pressing her thighs regularly. My pleasure in this was so great that I wondered that for this entertainment, which after all was precisely the most beautiful, one still had to pay nothing. I was convinced that I (and I alone) was cheating the world. Then the prostitute, her legs at rest, raised her upper body and turned her back to me, which to my horror was covered with large sealing-wax-red circles with paling edges and, between them, scattered red splashes. Now I noticed that her whole body was full of it, that I held my thumb on her thighs in such spots, and that on my fingers too these red particles lay as if from a shattered seal.

I stepped back among a number of men who, by the wall, near the mouth of the stairs, on which a little traffic was taking place, seemed to be waiting. They waited as men in the country stand together on Sunday morning at the market. For that reason it was Sunday too. Here too the comic scene took place, in that a man, of whom I and Max had reason to be afraid, went away, then came up the stairs, stepped up to me, and, while I and Max were anxiously expecting some terrible threat from him, put a ridiculously simple-minded question to me. Then I stood there and looked on anxiously as Max, without fear, sat somewhere to the left on the floor in this place and ate a thick potato soup, out of which the potatoes looked out as large balls, chiefly one. He pressed it with the spoon, perhaps with two spoons, down into the soup, or merely rolled it about.

October 10. Wrote a sophistical article for and against the institution for the Tetschen-Bodenbach Newspaper.

Yesterday evening on the Graben. Coming toward me three actresses who were coming from rehearsal. It is so hard to find one’s bearings quickly in the beauty of three women, when one also wants to look at two actors who behind them are coming along in the all too swinging and moreover buoyant actor’s stride. The two, of whom the one on the left with his youthfully fat face, the open overcoat flapping about the strong figure, is characteristic enough for both, overtake the ladies, the one on the left on the sidewalk, the one on the right down in the roadway. The one on the left grasped his hat high up, reaches into it with all five fingers, lifts it high and calls (only now does the one on the right remember): Good-bye! Good night! While, however, this overtaking and greeting has separated the gentlemen, the greeted women, as if led by the one nearest the roadway, who seems to be the weakest and tallest, but also youngest and most beautiful, quite undisturbed, with a light greeting hardly interrupting their attuned conversation, go on along their way. The whole seemed to me at the moment to be strong proof that the local theatrical conditions are ordered and well conducted.

The day before yesterday with the Jews in Café Savoy. The Seder Night by Feimann. At times we (at the moment the consciousness of this flashed through me) did not intervene in the action only because we were too excited, not because we were merely spectators.

13 October. Artless transition from the taut skin of my chief’s bald head to the delicate folds of his forehead. An obvious, very easily imitated weakness of nature, banknotes ought not to be made like that.

I did not consider the description of R. successful, but it must nevertheless have been better than I believed, or my impression of R. from the day before yesterday must have been so incomplete that the description corresponded to it or even outstripped it. For when I went home yesterday evening, the description came to me for moments, unnoticed it replaced the original impression, and I believed I had seen R. only yesterday, and indeed without Max, so that I prepared myself to tell him about her, just as I have described her to myself here.

Yesterday evening on the Schützeninsel, did not find my colleagues and went away again at once. I attracted some attention in my little coat with the crushed soft hat in my hand, for outside it was cold, but here hot from the breath of the beer-drinkers, smokers, and the wind players of the military orchestra. This orchestra was not very much raised, nor could it be, because the hall is fairly low, and filled out one end of the hall as far as the side walls. As if fitted in, the mass of musicians had been pushed into this end of the hall. This impression of crowdedness then lost itself a little in the hall, since the seats near the orchestra were fairly empty and the hall filled only toward the middle.

Talkativeness of Dr. K. Walked about with him for two hours behind the Franz-Josefs Station, asked him from time to time to let me go, had my hands clasped from impatience and listened as little as was possible. It seemed to me that a man who accomplishes good things in his profession, when he has talked himself into professional stories, must become irresponsible; his competence comes to his consciousness, from every story connections arise, and indeed several, he surveys them all, because he has lived through them, must in haste and out of consideration for me suppress many, some I also destroy for him by questions, but thereby bring him onto others, show him thereby that he also reigns far into my own thinking, his person has in most stories a fine role, which he only indicates, whereby what is kept silent seems to him still more significant; now, however, he is so sure of my admiration that he can also complain, for even in his misfortune, his torment, his doubt he is worthy of admiration, his opponents too are capable people and worth telling about; in a lawyer’s office that has four articled clerks and two chiefs, a disputed matter, in which he alone stood opposed to this office, was for weeks the daily talk of the six jurists. Their best speaker, a sharp jurist, stood opposed to him — to this is joined the Supreme Court, whose judgments are allegedly bad, contradictory to one another; I say, in the tone of departure, a trace of defense of this court, now he brings proofs that this court cannot be defended, and again one must go up and down the street, I am at once astonished at the badness of this court, thereupon he explains why that must be so, the court is overburdened, why and in what way, good, I must go, but now the Court of Cassation is better and the Administrative Court still much better and why and in what way, finally I can no longer be held, now he tries it with my own affairs, on account of which I have come to him (founding of the factory) and which we have already long since talked through, he hopes unconsciously to catch me in this way and to be able to entice me back again to his stories. Now I say something, but during my words hold out my hand expressly in farewell and in this way become free.

Incidentally he tells stories very well, in his telling there is mingled the precise being-spread-out of legal briefs with the lively speech such as one often finds among such fat, black, for the time being healthy, medium-sized Jews excited by continual cigarette smoking. Judicial expressions give the speech support, paragraphs are named whose high number seems to refer them into the distance. Every story is developed from the beginning, speech and counterspeech are brought forward and formally shaken by personal interpolated remarks, incidental matters, of which no one would think, are mentioned first, then called incidental and pushed aside (“a man, what his name is, is incidental” —), the listener is personally drawn in, questioned, while the story condenses alongside, sometimes the listener is even questioned before a story that cannot interest him at all, naturally uselessly, in order to establish some provisional relation, interpolated remarks of the listener are not at once, which would be annoying (Kubin), but, to be sure, soon, and yet only in the course of the narration, inserted at the right place, which as objective flattery draws the listener into the story, because it gives him a quite particular right to be a listener here.

14 October. Yesterday evening in the Savoy Sulamith by A. Goldfaden. Actually an opera, but every sung piece is called operetta, this small thing already seems to me to point to an artistic striving that is obstinate, overhasty, heated also for false reasons, cutting across European art in a partly accidental direction.

The story: A hero rescues a girl who has lost her way in the desert (“I pray to you, great, strong God”) and, in torments of thirst, has thrown herself into a cistern. They swear fidelity to one another (“my dear one, my dearest, my brilliant, found in the desert”) under invocation of the well and of a red-eyed desert cat. The girl, Sulamith (Mrs. Ts.), is led back by Cingitang, the wild servant of Absolon (P.), to Bethlehem to her father Manoach (Ts.), while Absolon (K.) still makes a journey to Jerusalem; there, however, he falls in love with Awigail, a rich girl from Jerusalem (Miss K.), forgets Sulamith and marries. Sulamith waits for her beloved at home in Bethlehem. “Many people go to Jeruscholajim and come beschulim.” “He, the fine one, wants to become unfaithful to me!” Through desperate outbursts she acquires for herself a confidence prepared for everything and resolves to pretend to be mad, in order not to have to marry and to be able to wait. “My will is of iron, my heart I make into a fortress.” And still in the madness which she now plays for years, sadly and loudly, with the forced permission of everyone, she enjoys the memory of the beloved, for her madness deals only with the desert, the well and the cat. Through her madness she at once drives away her three suitors, with whom Manoach could get along in peace only by arranging a lottery: Joel Gedoni (U.), “I am the strongest Jewish hero,” Avidanov, the landowner (R. P.), and the paunchy priest Nathan (Löwy), who feels himself above everyone, “Give her to me, I die for her.” Absolon had misfortune, one child has been bitten to death by a desert cat, the second falls into a well. He remembers his guilt, confesses everything to Awigail. “Moderate your weeping.” “Stop with your word, splitting my heart.” “Unfortunately everything is Emes that I say.” Several circles of thought form themselves around both and pass away. Is Absolon to return to Sulamith and leave Awigail? Sulamith too deserves Rachmones. At last Awigail releases him. In Bethlehem Manoach laments over his daughter: “Woe, O my old years.” Absolon heals her with his voice. “The rest, Father, I shall tell you later.” Awigail sinks down there below in the vineyard of Jerusalem, Absolon has as justification only his heroism.

At the end of the performance we still wait for the actor Löwy, whom I should like to admire in the dust. As usual he is to “announce”: Dear guests, I thank you in the name of us all for your visit and cordially invite you to tomorrow’s performance, in which the world-famous masterpiece — by — will be brought to performance. Till we meet again! Off with hat-waving.

Instead of this we see the curtain at one moment held fast shut, then again experimentally drawn a little bit apart. It lasts rather long. At last it is drawn wide apart, in the middle a button holds it together, behind it we see Löwy make his step to the footlights and, with only his hands, his face turned toward us, the audience, defend himself against someone who is attacking him from below, until suddenly the whole curtain with its upper wire fastening is torn down by Löwy, who wants to have a hold, and Löwy before our eyes, buckling at the knees, is embraced by P., who has played the Savage and who still, as if the curtain were drawn, keeps himself bent down, and is positively shoved headfirst sideways down from the podium. People run together in the side wing of the hall. “Draw the curtain!” people cry on the almost wholly exposed stage, on which Frau Ts. with the pale Sulamith face stands so pitiably, small waiters on tables and chairs bring the curtain half-way into order, the proprietor tries to calm the government representative, who has only the one wish, to get away, and is held back by this attempt at calming, behind the curtain one hears Frau Ts.: “There we want to preach morality to the audience from the stage ...” The Association of Jewish Chancery Servants “Future,” which has taken over tomorrow evening under its own direction and before today’s performance has held a proper general meeting, resolves, on account of this incident, to convene within half an hour an extraordinary meeting, a Czech member of the association prophesies to the actors, as a consequence of their scandalous behavior, complete downfall. Then suddenly one sees Löwy, who had as if disappeared, being pushed by the headwaiter R. with his hands, perhaps also with his knees, toward a door. He is simply to be thrown out. This headwaiter, who before every guest, before us too, earlier and later stands there like a dog, with a doggish snout that lowers itself over a large mouth closed by humble side-folds, has his ...

16 October. Exhausting Sunday yesterday. The whole staff has given Father notice. Through good speeches, cordiality, the effect of his illness, of his stature and former strength, of his experience, of his cleverness, he fights almost all of them back to himself in general and private discussions. An important office clerk, F., wants time to consider, until Monday, because he has given his word to our manager, who is leaving and would like to draw the whole staff over into the business he is about to found. On Sunday the bookkeeper writes, he cannot after all stay, R. will not release him from his word.

I go to him in Žižkov. His young wife, with round cheeks, a longish face and a small, coarse nose, of the kind that never spoils Czech faces. Too long, very loose, flowered and stained dressing gown. It becomes especially long and loose because she makes especially hurried movements in order to greet me, as a last embellishment to lay the album on the table straight and to disappear, in order to have her husband fetched. The man with similar hurried movements, perhaps imitated from the very dependent wife, swinging strongly with the upper body bent forward, while meanwhile the lower body remains strikingly behind. Impression of a person known for ten years, often seen, little regarded, with whom one suddenly comes into closer relation. The less success I have with my Czech persuasion (he already had, after all, a signed contract with R., only on Saturday evening he had been so disconcerted by my father that he had not spoken of the contract), the more catlike his face becomes. Toward the end I play a little, with a very comfortable feeling, thus I look silently about the room with a somewhat drawn-out face and diminished eyes, as though I were pursuing something indicated into the unsayable. But am not unhappy when I see that it has little effect, and that I, instead of being addressed by him in a new tone, must begin again, talking into him. The conversation was introduced by the fact that on the other side of the street another T. lives, it was concluded at the door with his astonishment over my light suit in the cold. Characteristic of my first hopes and final failure. But I obliged him to come to Father in the afternoon. My argumentation in places too abstract and formal. Mistake, not to have called the wife into the room.

Afternoon to Radotin, in order to keep the office clerk. Thereby I miss being together with Löwy, of whom I am continually thinking. In the carriage: tip of the old woman’s nose with almost still youthful, taut skin. Does youth, then, end on the tip of the nose and does death begin there? The swallowing of the passengers, which glides down the throat, the widening of the mouth as a sign that they judge the railway journey, the composition of the other passengers, their seating arrangement, the temperature in the carriage, even the issue of ›Pan‹ which I have on my knees and which several of them look at from time to time (since it is, after all, something they could not possibly have foreseen in the compartment), to be unobjectionable, natural, unsuspect, while they still believe that everything could also have been much worse.

Up and down in Mr. H.’s courtyard, a dog lays one paw on the tip of my foot, which I am rocking. Children, hens, here and there grown-ups. A nursemaid, at times bending down from the gallery or hiding behind a door, has a desire for me. Under her glances I do not know what precisely I am, whether indifferent, ashamed, young or old, insolent or clinging, holding my hands behind me or in front, freezing or hot, animal-lover or businessman, friend of H.’s or petitioner, superior to the participants in the meeting, who sometimes in an unbroken loop go from the room into the urinal and back, or ridiculous on account of my light suit, whether Jew or Christian, etc. The walking about, nose-wiping, now and then reading in Pan, fearfully avoiding the gallery with my eyes, in order suddenly to recognize it as empty, watching the poultry, letting myself be greeted by a man, seeing through the tavern window the flat and crooked faces set beside one another of the men turned toward a speaker, all this helps toward it. Mr. H., who from time to time comes out of the meeting and whom I ask to use for us his influence on the clerk whom he has brought into our business. Black-brown beard, growing round cheeks and chin, black eyes, between eyes and beard the dark tones of the cheeks. He is a friend of my father’s, I knew him already as a child, and the idea that he was a coffee-roaster had always made him still darker and more manly to me than he was.

17 October. I get nothing finished, because I have no time and it presses so inside me. If the whole day were free and this morning unrest in me could rise until noon and tire itself out by evening, then I could sleep. But as it is there remains for this unrest at most only a twilight hour, it strengthens itself a little, is then pressed down and digs up the night for me uselessly and harmfully. Shall I endure it long? And is there any purpose in enduring it, shall I then get time?

When I think of this anecdote: Napoleon tells at the court table in Erfurt: When I was still a mere lieutenant in the fifth regiment ... (the royal highnesses look at one another in embarrassment, Napoleon notices it and corrects himself), when I still had the honor of being a mere lieutenant ...; the veins in my neck swell with lightly vicariously felt pride, artificially forcing its way into me.

Further in Radotin: I then walked about alone, freezing, in the meadow-garden, then recognized in the open window the nursemaid who had wandered with me to this side of the house –

20 October. The 18th at Max’s; wrote about Paris. Badly written, without actually coming out into the open of real description, which loosens one’s foot from the experience. I was also dull after the great exaltation of the previous day, which had ended with Löwy’s reading. During the day I had not yet been in any extraordinary condition, had gone with Max to fetch his mother, arrived from Gablonz, had been with them in the coffeehouse and then at Max’s, who played for me from The Maid of Perth a gypsy dance. A dance in which for pages on end only the hips sway with monotonous ticking, and the face has a slow, heartfelt expression. Until then toward the end, briefly and late, the enticed inner wildness comes, shakes the body, overwhelms it, compresses the melody, so that it strikes into height and depth (especially bitter, muffled tones can be heard out of it) and then makes an unnoticed close. At the beginning and unlosably during the whole, a strong nearness to gypsydom, perhaps because a people so wild in dance shows itself calmly only to a friend. Impression of great truth of the first dance. Then leafed through Sayings of Napoleon. How easily one becomes for moments a little particle of one’s own enormous conception of Napoleon! Then I went home already boiling, I could withstand none of my imaginings, disordered, pregnant, disheveled, swollen, in the midst of my furniture rolling around me; overflown by my sufferings and worries, taking up as much space as possible, for despite my bulk I was very nervous, I moved into the lecture hall. From the manner in which, for example, I sat, and sat very truthfully, I would as a spectator have recognized my condition at once.

Löwy read humorous sketches by Sholem Aleichem, then a story by Perez, a poem by Bialik (only here has the poet, in order to popularize his poem exploiting the Kishinev pogrom for the Jewish future, condescended from Hebrew into jargon and himself translated his originally Hebrew poem into jargon), the “Light-Seller” by Rosenfeld. A tearing-open of the eyes, natural to the actor, recurring, which are then left standing so for a little while, framed by the raised eyebrows. Complete truth of the whole reading; the weak lifting of the right arm, occasioned from the shoulder, the pushing at the pince-nez, which seems borrowed, so badly does it fit the nose; the position of the leg under the table, which is so stretched out that especially the weak connecting bones between upper and lower leg are in action; the curvature of the back, which looks weak and miserable, since the observer, confronted with a uniform, monotonous back, does not let himself be deceived in judgment, as can happen when looking at the face through the eyes, the hollows and protrusions of the cheeks, or even through every little thing, be it only a beard-stubble. After the reading, already on the way home, I felt all faculties gathered together and therefore lamented to my sisters, at home even to my mother.

On the 19th at Dr. K.’s on account of the factory. The slight theoretical hostility that must arise between the contracting parties when contracts are concluded. How with my eyes I searched H.’s face, which was turned toward the doctor. This hostility must arise all the more between two people who otherwise are not accustomed to think through their mutual relation, and therefore take offense at every trifle. – Dr. K.’s habit of walking diagonally about the room, with the tense, salon-like forward-swaying of the upper body, at the same time telling things and frequently at the end of a diagonal shaking the ash of his cigarette into one of the three ashtrays distributed about the room.

This morning at the firm N. N. How the chief braces himself sideways with his back into his armchair, in order to get space and support for his East-Jewish hand movements. The interplay and mutual self-intensifying of the play of hands and features. Sometimes he connects both, by either looking at his hands or holding them, for the listener’s convenience, close to his face. Temple melodies in the intonation of his speech, especially when enumerating several points he leads the melody from finger to finger as over various registers. Then on the Graben met Father with a Mr. Pr., who even raises his hand, so that the sleeve falls back a little (he himself will not, after all, pull the sleeve back) and in the middle of the Graben makes the mighty screw movements with the slipping-open of the hand and spreading-out of the fingers.

I am probably ill, since yesterday my body has been itching everywhere. In the afternoon I had such a hot, variously colored face that, while having my hair cut, I feared the assistant, who after all could continually see me and my mirror image, would recognize in me a serious illness. Also the connection between stomach and mouth is partly disturbed, a guilder-sized lid either rises and falls or lies below and radiates upward with an effect, spreading out, covering the surface of the chest, slightly pressing.

Further in Radotin: Invited her to come down. The first answer was serious, although up to then, with the girl entrusted to her, she had giggled and coquetted across to me in a way she would never have dared from the moment we were acquainted. We then laughed a great deal together, although I below and she above at the open window froze. She pressed her breasts against her crossed arms and everything, with knees apparently bent, against the window ledge. She was seventeen years old and took me for fifteen to sixteen years old Kafka’s real age at that time was twenty-eight years, from which, throughout our whole conversation, she was not to be dissuaded. Her little nose went somewhat crookedly and therefore cast an unusual shadow on the cheek, which, however, could not help me to recognize her again. She was not from Radotin, but from Chuchle (the next station toward Prague), which she did not want to let be forgotten. Then walk with the clerk, who even without my journey would have remained in our business, in the dark on the country road out of Radotin and back to the station. On one side desolate elevations, exploited by a cement factory for its lime-sand requirement. Old mills. Account of a poplar churned out of the earth by a whirlwind together with its roots, first going steeply out of the earth, then spreading. Face of the clerk: doughlike reddish flesh on strong bones, looks tired, but within its limits strong. Does not wonder even in his tone of voice that we are walking here together. On a large field, bought by a factory as a precaution, left fallow for the time being, lying in the middle of the place, surrounded by factory buildings strongly, but only in places, struck by electric light, clear moon, smoke from a chimney filled with light, therefore cloudy. Train signals. Rustling of rats beside the long path crossing the field, trodden in by the population against the will of the factory.

Examples of the strengthening which I owe to this writing, on the whole after all insignificant:

Monday the 16th, I was with Löwy at the National Theater at ›Dubrovnická trilogie‹ ›Trilogy from Ragusa‹, by Ivo Vojnović. Play and performance were comfortless. What remains in my memory from the first act is the beautiful sound of a mantel clock; the singing of the Marseillaise by Frenchmen marching in before the window, again and again the dying-away song is taken up by the new arrivals and rises; a girl dressed in black draws her shadow through the strip of light which the setting sun lays on the parquet. From the second act there remains only the delicate neck of a girl, which out of reddish-brown-clad shoulders between puffed sleeves stretches and tightens toward the small head. From the third act the crushed imperial coat, the dark fancy waistcoat with a gold watch-chain drawn crosswise, of an old bent descendant of the former Gospodars. That is not much, then. The seats were expensive, I, as a bad benefactor, had thrown money away here, while he was in need; finally he was bored still somewhat more than I. In short, I had again proved the misfortune which all undertakings have that I begin alone. But whereas otherwise I unite myself inseparably with this misfortune, draw all earlier misfortunes up to me, all later ones down to me, I was each time almost completely independent, bore everything as something that happens only once quite lightly and even felt for the first time in the theater my head as a spectator’s head, out of the gathered darkness of the armchair and body lifted up into a particular light, independent of the bad occasion of this play and this performance.

A second example: Yesterday evening in the Mariengasse I offered both my sisters-in-law both hands at the same time with a skill as if they were two right hands and I a double person.

October 21. A counterexample: I cannot, when he consults with me about office matters (today the card index), look my chief in the eyes for long without there coming into my gaze, against all my will, a slight bitterness, which drives off either my gaze or his. His gaze more fleetingly, but more often, since, not being conscious of the reason, he gives way to every inducement to look away, but at once lets his gaze return, since he takes the whole thing only for a momentary weariness of his eyes. I defend myself against it more strongly, therefore accelerate the zigzag quality of my gaze, still look most willingly along his nose and into the shadows toward the cheeks, often hold my face in his direction only with the help of the teeth and the tongue in the closed mouth — if it must be, I do lower my eyes, but never deeper than to his necktie, but at once get the fullest look when he turns his eyes away and I follow him exactly and without regard.

The Jewish actors: Frau Tschissik has protrusions on her cheeks near the mouth. Produced partly by sunken cheeks as a result of the sufferings of hunger, childbed, journeys and acting, partly by unusual muscles at rest, which had to develop for the acting movements of her large mouth, originally certainly ponderous. As Sulamith she usually had her hair loose, which covered her cheeks, so that her face sometimes looked like a girl’s face from an earlier time. She has a large, bony, moderately strong body and is tightly laced. Her gait easily takes on something solemn, since she has the habit of raising her long arms, stretching them out and moving them slowly. Especially when she sang the Jewish national song, rocked weakly in the broad hips and moved the arms, bent parallel to the hips, up and down, with hollowed hands, as if she were playing with a slowly flying ball.

22 October. Yesterday at the Jews. Kol Nidre by Scharkansky, a rather bad piece with a good witty letter-writing scene, a prayer of the lovers standing upright beside one another with folded hands, the converted Grand Inquisitor’s leaning against the curtain of the Ark, he climbs the step and remains there, head bowed, lips on the curtain, standing, holds the prayer book before his chattering teeth. For the first time on this fourth evening my distinct incapacity to receive a pure impression. To blame for it too was our large company and the visits to my sister’s table. Nevertheless, so weak I ought not to have been. With my love for Frau Ts., who only thanks to Max was sitting beside me, I behaved miserably. But I shall come up again, already now it is better.

Mrs. Tschissik (I like so much to write the name down), at table even during the eating of roast goose, likes to incline her head, one believes one can get with one’s glance under her eyelids, if one first looks carefully along the cheeks and then, making oneself small, slips inside, whereby one need not even first lift the lids, for they are lifted and are just letting a bluish gleam through, which entices one to the attempt. From the multitude of her true acting there come here and there thrusts of the fist, turnings of the arm, which draws invisible trains in folds about the body, the laying of the spread fingers on the breast, because the artless cry does not suffice. Her acting is not manifold: the frightened looking at her opposite player, the search for a way out on the small stage, the gentle voice, which in a straight short ascent only with the help of greater inward resonance, without reinforcement, becomes heroic, the joy which through her opening face, spreading over the high forehead to the hair, penetrates into her, the self-sufficiency in solo singing without the addition of new means, the straightening of herself in resistance, which compels the spectator to concern himself with her whole body; and not much more. But there is the truth of the whole and consequently the conviction that not the slightest of her effects can be taken from her, that she is independent of the play and of us.

The pity that we have for these actors, who are so good and earn nothing and otherwise too receive by far not enough thanks and fame, is actually only the pity over the sad fate of many noble endeavors and above all of our own. That is why it is also so disproportionately strong, because outwardly it attaches itself to strange people and in reality belongs to us. Nevertheless, however, it is after all so closely bound up with the actors that I cannot even now detach it from them. Because I recognize it, it binds itself to them still more, out of defiance.

The striking smoothness of Frau Tschissik’s cheeks beside her muscular mouth. Her somewhat misshapen little girl.

With Löwy and my sister walking for three hours.

23 October. The actors convince me by their presence, again and again to my terror, that most of what I have so far written down about them is false. It is false because with unchanging love (only now, as I write it down, does this too become false), but with changing strength I write about them, and this changing strength does not strike loudly and rightly against the real actors, but dully loses itself in this love, which will never be satisfied with the strength and therefore, by holding it back, thinks it is protecting the actors.

Quarrel between Tschissik and Löwy. Ts.: Edelstatt is the greatest Jewish writer. He is sublime. Rosenfeld is of course also a great writer, but not the first. Löwy: Ts. is a socialist and because Edelstatt makes socialist poems (he is editor of a social-Jewish newspaper in London), therefore Ts. considers him the greatest. But who is Edelstatt, his party knows him, otherwise no one, but Rosenfeld knows the world. – Ts.: Recognition is not what matters. Everything by Edelstatt is sublime. – L.: I know him very well too, after all. The “Suicide,” for example, is very good. – Ts.: What use is the quarrel? We will not agree. I will state my opinion until tomorrow and you too. – L.: I until the day after tomorrow.

Goldfaden, married, spendthrift even in great need. About a hundred plays. Stolen liturgical melodies made popular. The whole people sings them. The tailor at his work (is imitated), the servant girl etc.

With so little room for dressing one must, as Ts. says, get into quarrels. One comes excited from the stage, each thinks himself the greatest actor, if then one, for example, steps on another’s foot, which is not to be avoided, then not only is a quarrel ready, but a great battle. Yes, in Warsaw, there were seventy-five small separate dressing rooms, each lighted.

At six o’clock I met the actors in their coffeehouse, around two tables, arranged according to the two hostile groups, sitting. On the table of the Ts. group there was a book by Perez. Löwy had just closed it and stood up to go away with me.

Until his twentieth year Löwy was a Bocher, who studied and spent his well-to-do father’s money. There was there a society of young people of the same age, who just on Saturday came together in a closed-off place and smoked in kaftans and otherwise sinned against the holiday commandments.

“The Great Eagle,” the most famous Yiddish actor from New York, who is a millionaire, for whom Gordin wrote the ‘Wild Man’ and whom Löwy in Karlsbad begged, please not on any account to come to the performance, since before him, on their badly equipped stage, he would not have the courage to act. – Only scenery, not this miserable stage, on which one cannot move. How shall we play the ‘Wild Man’! There one needs a divan. In the Crystal Palace Leipzig it was magnificent. Windows that one could open, the sun shone in, one needed a throne in the play, good, there was a throne, I went through the crowd to it and was really a king. There it is much easier to act. Here everything confuses one.

24 October. Mother works the whole day, is cheerful and sad, as it comes, without being in the least occupied by her own conditions, her voice is bright, too loud for ordinary speaking, but beneficent when one is sad and after some time suddenly hears it. For a long time now I have been complaining that though I am always ill, I never have a particular illness which would compel me to lie down in bed. This wish surely goes back for the greater part to the fact that I know how Mother can comfort, when for example she comes out of the lighted living room into the twilight of the sickroom, or in the evening, when the day begins monotonously to pass over into night, returns from the shop and with her worries and rapid arrangements lets the already so late day begin once more and encourages the sick person to help her in it. That is what I would wish for again, because then I would be weak, therefore convinced of everything Mother did, and with the clearer capacity for enjoyment of age could have childish joys. Yesterday it occurred to me that I have not always loved Mother as she deserved and as I could, only because the German language has prevented me from doing so. The Jewish mother is no “mother,” the designation mother makes her a little comic (not herself, because we are in Germany), we give a Jewish woman the name German mother, but forget the contradiction, which sinks all the more heavily into feeling. “Mother” is for the Jew especially German, unconsciously it contains, besides the Christian radiance, also Christian coldness, the Jewish woman named mother therefore becomes not only comic, but strange. Mama would be a better name, if only behind it one did not imagine “mother.” I believe that only memories of the ghetto still preserve the Jewish family, for the word father too by no means means the Jewish father.

Today I stood before Councillor L., who unexpectedly, unasked, childishly, mendaciously ridiculously and to the point of impatience inquired about my illness. We had already long, or perhaps not even at all yet, spoken so intimately, then I felt how my face, never before so closely observed by him, opened itself for him into false, badly understood, but in any case surprising to him, parts. For myself I was not to be recognized. I know him quite exactly.

October 26. Thursday. Yesterday Löwy read aloud all afternoon God, Man, Devil by Gordin and then from his own diaries of Paris. The day before yesterday I was at the performance of The Wild Man by Gordin. Gordin is better than Lateiner, Scharkansky, Feimann, etc., for this reason, that he has more details, more order and more consecutiveness in this order, in return for this there is here no longer quite the immediate, almost once-and-for-all improvised Jewishness of the other plays, the noise of this Jewishness sounds duller and therefore again less detailed. Concessions are indeed made to the public and sometimes one thinks one must stretch oneself in order to see the play away over the heads of the New York Jewish theater audience (the figure of the wild man, the whole story of Mrs. Selde), worse, however, is that palpable concessions are also made to some divined art, that for example in The Wild Man the action flutters for an entire act, in consequence of scruples, that the wild man makes speeches humanly indistinct, but literarily so coarse, that one would rather close one’s eyes, the older girl in God, Man, Devil is likewise so. Very bold in part is the action of The Wild Man. A young widow marries an old man who has four children, and at once brings her lover, Vladimir Worobeitschik, with her into the marriage. Now the two ruin the whole family, Schmul Leiblich (Pipes) must give up all the money and falls ill, the eldest son Simon (Klug), a student, leaves the house, Alexander becomes a gambler and drunkard, Lise (Tschissik) becomes a whore and Lemech (Löwy), the idiot, is brought, in relation to Mrs. Seide, by hatred, because she takes the place of his mother, and by love, because she is the first young woman near to him, into an idiotic madness. The action driven so far resolves itself with the murder of Seide by Lemech. All the others remain for the spectator in unfinished helpless memory. The invention of this woman and her lover, an invention that asks no one for his opinion, has given me unclear, various self-confidence.

The discreet impression of the theater-bill. One learns not only the names, but something more, yet still only so much as must become known to the public, and even to the most well-disposed and boldest public, about a family exposed to its judgment. Schmul Leiblich is a “rich merchant,” but it is not said that he is old and sickly, a ridiculous lover of women, a bad father and an impious widower, who marries on the anniversary of his wife’s death. And yet all these designations would be more correct than that of the theater-bill, for at the end of the play he is no longer rich, because Seide has robbed him, nor is he hardly a merchant any longer, since he has neglected his business. Simon is on the theater-bill “a student,” thus something very vague, which, to our knowledge, many sons of our most distant acquaintances are. Alexander, this characterless young man, is only “Alexander,” of “Lise,” the domestic girl, one knows also only that she is “Lise.” Lemech is unfortunately “an idiot,” for that is something that cannot be kept silent. Wladimir Worobeitschik is only “Selde’s beloved,” but not the corrupter of a family, not a drunkard, gambler, libertine, idler, parasite. With the designation “Selde’s beloved” much is indeed betrayed, but with regard to his conduct it is the least that one can say. Now in addition the place of the action is Russia, the scarcely assembled persons are scattered over an enormous territory or assembled at a small undisclosed point of this territory, in short, the play has become impossible, the spectator will get nothing to see.

Nevertheless the piece begins, the evidently great powers of the author are at work, things come to light which one would not credit to those of the playbill, but which belong to them with the greatest certainty, if only one were willing to believe the whipping, tearing away, beating, shoulder-patting, fainting, throat-cutting, limping, dancing in Russian cuffed boots, dancing with raised women’s skirts, rolling about on the canapé, because these are, after all, things where no contradiction is of any help. It is, however, not even necessary to have the climax of the audience’s excitement as lived through in recollection, in order to recognize that the discreet impression of the playbill is a false impression, one that can form only after the performance, but now is already incorrect, indeed impossible, one that can arise only in someone standing tiredly aside, since for the honest judge after the performance there is no longer anything permissible to be seen between playbill and performance.

Begun from the dash, written in despair, because today cards are being played especially noisily, I have to sit at the common table, O. laughs with her mouth full, gets up, sits down, reaches across the table, speaks to me, and I, to complete the misfortune, write so badly and have to think of Löwy’s good Paris memories, written with uninterrupted feeling, which come from an independent fire, while I, at least now, certainly chiefly because I have so little time, stand almost wholly under Max’s influence, which sometimes, as something superfluous besides, also spoils for me the pleasure in his works. Because it comforts me, I write down for myself an autobiographical remark of Shaw’s, although in fact it contains the opposite of comfort: As a boy he was an apprentice in the office of a land agent in Dublin. He soon gave up this position and traveled to London and became a writer. In the first nine years, from 1876-1885, he earned altogether one hundred and forty crowns. “But although I was a strong young man and my family found itself in bad circumstances, I did not throw myself into the struggle of life; I threw my mother into it and let myself be supported by her. I was no support to my old father, on the contrary, I hung on to his coattails.” In the end it comforts me a little. The years that he spent free in London are already over for me, the possible happiness passes more and more into the impossible, I lead a dreadful substitute life and am cowardly and wretched enough to follow Shaw only so far that I have read the passage aloud to my parents. How this possible life flashes before my eyes with steel colors, with taut steel rods and airy darkness between them!

October 27. Löwy’s stories and diaries: how Notre Dame frightens him, how the tiger in the Jardin des Plantes seizes him, as a representation of the despairing and hoping one, who in feeding satisfies despair and hope; how his pious father, in his imagination, questions him, whether he can now go walking on Saturday, whether he now has time to read modern books, whether he may eat on the fast days, while he must after all work on Saturday, has no time at all and fasts more than any religion has ever prescribed. When, chewing at his black bread, he walks through the alleys, from a distance it looks as if he were eating chocolate. The work in the cap factory and his friend, the socialist, who considers everyone a bourgeois who does not work exactly as he does, for instance Löwy with his fine hands, who is bored on Sundays, who despises reading as something luxurious, cannot read himself and with irony asks Löwy to read him a letter he has received.

The Jewish cleansing water, which in Russia every Jewish community has, which I imagine to myself as a cabin, with a basin of water of exactly determined outlines, with arrangements ordered and supervised by the rabbi, which has only to wash the earthly dirt from the soul, whose outward condition is therefore a matter of indifference, which is a symbol, therefore can be dirty and stinking and also is so, but nevertheless fulfills its purpose. The woman comes here in order to cleanse herself from the period, the Torah-scribe in order, before writing down the last sentence of a Torah section, to cleanse himself of all sinful thoughts.

Custom, immediately after waking, to dip the fingers three times in water, since the evil spirits settle in the night on the second and third joints of the fingers. Rationalistic explanation: it is to be prevented that the fingers go straight into the face, since in sleep and dream, uncontrolled, they may have touched all possible parts of the body, the armpits, the bottom, the genitals.

The dressing room behind their stage is so narrow that, if someone happens to be standing behind the door-curtain of the scene in front of the mirror and a second wants to get past him, he must lift that curtain and against his will show himself for a moment to the audience.

Superstition: If one drinks from an imperfect glass, the evil spirits gain entrance into the human being.

How sore the actors seemed to me after the performance, how I was afraid to touch them with a word. How I preferred, after a fleeting handshake, to go away quickly, as though I were angry and dissatisfied, because to express the truth of my impression was so impossible. All seemed false to me except Max, who calmly said several contentless things. False, however, was the one who inquired after an impudent detail, false the one who gave a joking answer to a remark of the actor, false the ironic one, false the one who began to dissolve his manifold impression, all rabble, which, rightly pressed down into the depths of the auditorium, now late at night rose up and noticed its value again. (Very far from the right.)

28 October. I did indeed have a similar feeling, but on that evening neither the acting nor the play seemed to me by any means perfect. Precisely for that reason, however, I was obliged to a special reverence before the actors. Who knows, in the case of small gaps in the impression, even if there are many of them, who bears the blame for them. Frau Tschissik once stepped on the hem of her dress and for a moment swayed in her princess-like harlot’s dress, like a massive column, once she misspoke and turned, in order to soothe her tongue, in strong agitation toward the back wall, although this did not precisely correspond to the words; it confused me, but it did not prevent the touch of shudders high on the cheekbones, which I always feel when I hear her voice. But because the other acquaintances had received a much more impure impression than I, they seemed to me obliged to an even greater reverence than I, also for the reason that in my opinion their reverence would have been much more effective than mine, so that I had a double reason to curse their behavior.

“Axioms on Drama” by Max in the “Schaubühne.” Has entirely the character of a dream-truth, for which the expression “axioms” also fits. The more dreamily it inflates itself, the more coolly one must take hold of it. The following principles are pronounced:

The essence of drama lies in a lack, is the thesis.

Drama (on the stage) is more exhaustive than the novel, because we see everything of which otherwise we only read.

That is only apparently so, for in the novel the poet can show us only what is most important, in drama on the other hand we see everything, the actor, the decorations, therefore not only what is important, therefore less. In the sense of the novel, therefore, the best drama would be one entirely without stimulation, for example a philosophical drama, which would be read aloud by seated actors in any room decoration whatever.

And yet the best drama is that which in time and space gives the most suggestions, frees itself from all the demands of life, confines itself only to the speeches, to the thoughts in monologues, to the main points of the action, administers everything else by means of suggestions and, lifted high upon a shield borne by actors, painters, directors, follows only its outermost promptings.

Error in this conclusion: it changes, without indicating it, the standpoint, sees the things now from the writing-room, now from the audience. Granted that the audience does not see everything in the poet’s sense, that the performance surprises even him (29 October, Sunday), still he has had the play with all its details within him, has moved on from detail to detail and only because he gathers all the details in the speeches has he given them their dramatic weight and force. Through this the drama, in its highest development, falls into an unbearable humanization, which to draw down, to make bearable, is the task of the actor, who, loosened, frayed, carries the role prescribed to him fluttering about him. The drama thus hovers in the air, but not as a roof borne by the storm, rather as an entire building whose foundation walls have, with a force even today still very close to madness, been torn upward out of the earth.

Sometimes it seems that the play rests up above in the flies, that the actors have pulled strips of it down, whose ends they hold in their hands for the performance or have wound around their bodies, and that only here and there a strip difficult to detach lifts an actor into the air, to the terror of the audience.

I dreamed today of a greyhound-like donkey, which in its movements was very reserved. I observed him closely, because I was conscious of the rarity of the apparition, but retained of it only the memory that his narrow human feet, because of their length and uniformity, would not please me. I offered him fresh, dark-green cypress tufts, which I had just received from an old Zurich lady (the whole thing took place in Zurich), he did not want them, only sniffed at them lightly; but when I then left them lying on a table, he ate them up so completely on me that only a scarcely recognizable chestnut-like kernel remained. Later there was talk of the fact that this donkey had never yet gone on all fours, but always held himself humanly upright and showed his silver-shining breast and the little belly. But that was actually not right.

Besides this I dreamed of an Englishman whom I met in an assembly, similar to that of the Salvation Army in Zurich. There were seats there as in school, under the writing surface there was namely still an open compartment; when I once reached into it in order to put something in order, I wondered how easily one makes friendships while traveling. By this the Englishman was evidently meant, who shortly afterward came up to me. He had light-colored, loose clothes, which were in very good condition, only behind on the upper arms, instead of the clothing material, or at least sewn fast over it, there was a gray, wrinkled, somewhat hanging, stripedly torn material, dotted as if by spiders, which recalled both the leather inserts in riding breeches and the sleeve protectors of seamstresses, shopgirls, female office clerks. His face was likewise covered with a gray material, which had very skillful cutouts for mouth, eyes, probably also for the nose. This material, however, was new, roughened, rather flannel-like, very supple and soft, of excellent English manufacture. I liked all this so much that I was eager to become acquainted with the man. He also wanted to invite me to his dwelling, but since I already had to leave the day after tomorrow, it came to nothing. Before he left the assembly, he put on a few more evidently very practical articles of clothing, which, after he had buttoned them, made him entirely inconspicuous. Although he could not invite me to his place, he nevertheless asked me to go with him into the street. I followed him, we remained standing opposite the assembly hall at the edge of the pavement, I below, he above, and found again after some conversation that nothing could come of the invitation.

Then I dreamed that Max, Otto (my brother and friend, the poet Otto Brod. The three of us made the journey to Riva and Brescia in 1909.) and I had the habit of packing our suitcases only at the station. Thus, for example, we carried the shirts through the main hall to our distant suitcases. Although this seemed to be the general custom, it did not prove itself with us, especially because we began packing only shortly before the train’s arrival. Then we were of course agitated and had hardly any hope still of reaching the train, let alone of getting good seats.

Although the regular guests and employees of the coffeehouse love the actors, still they cannot preserve their respect between the prostrating impressions and despise the actors as starving wretches, itinerants, fellow-Jews, exactly as in historical times. Thus the head waiter wanted to throw Löwy out of the hall, the door-opener, a former brothel employee and present pimp, shouted down little Tschissik when, in the excitement of her sympathy during “The Wild Man,” she had wanted to hand something or other to the actors, and when the day before yesterday I accompanied Löwy back to the coffeehouse, after he had read aloud to me in Café City the first act of Gordin’s “Elieser ben Schevia,” that fellow called out to him (he squints and has, between the curved pointed nose and the mouth, a depression out of which a little moustache bristles): “Come on, idiot. (Allusion to the role in ‘The Wild Man.’) They are waiting. A visitor is here today such as you really do not deserve. Even a volunteer from the artillery is here, look here.” And he points to one of the curtained coffeehouse panes, behind which that volunteer is supposedly sitting. Löwy passes his hand over his forehead: “From Elieser ben Schevia to this.

The sight of stairways takes hold of me so today. Already early and several times since then I took pleasure in the triangular section, visible from my window, of the stone railing of that staircase which, to the right of the Čech Bridge, leads down to the quay plateau. Very inclined, as if it gave only a quick indication. And now I see over there across the river a ladder-stair on the embankment, which leads to the water. It has always been there, but is uncovered only in autumn and winter through the removal of the swimming school otherwise lying before it, and lies there in the dark grass under the brown trees in the play of perspective.

Löwy: Four friends of youth became in old age great Talmud scholars. Each, however, had a special fate. One became insane, one died, Rabbi Eliezer became at forty a freethinker, and only the eldest of them, Akiba, who had first begun to study at forty, came to complete knowledge. The pupil of Eliezer was Rabbi Meir, a pious man whose piety was so great that the instruction of the freethinker did him no harm. He ate, as he said, the kernel of the nut, the shell he threw away. On Saturday Eliezer once took a ride, Rabbi Meir followed on foot, the Talmud in his hand, though only two thousand paces, for farther one may not go on Saturday. And here out of the walk there arose a symbolic speech and counter-speech. “Come back to your people,” said Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Eliezer refused with a play on words.

30 October. This desire, which I almost always have when for once I feel my stomach healthy, to heap up in myself imaginings of dreadful ventures with food. Especially before smoked-meat shops I satisfy this desire. If I see a sausage which a label identifies as an old hard house sausage, I bite into it in my imagination with my whole set of teeth and swallow quickly, regularly and ruthlessly, like a machine. The despair which this deed, even in imagination, has as its immediate consequence increases my haste. The long rinds of rib meat I thrust unbitten into my mouth and then draw them out again from behind, tearing through stomach and intestines. Dirty grocers’ shops I eat completely empty. Fill myself up with herrings, cucumbers and all bad old sharp foods. Sweets are poured into me out of their tin pots like hail. In this way I enjoy not only my healthy condition, but also a suffering which is without pains and can pass at once.

It is my old habit, pure impressions, whether they are painful or joyful, if only they have reached their highest purity, not to let them run beneficently through my whole being, but to cloud them and drive them away by means of new, unforeseen, weak impressions. It is not evil intention, to harm myself, but weakness in enduring the purity of that impression, which however is not admitted, but rather, under inward silence, by an apparently arbitrary calling forth of the new impression, seeks to help itself, instead of, what alone would be right, revealing itself and calling other forces to its support.

Thus, for example, on Saturday evening, after listening to the good novella by Fräulein T. I was writing at that time, together with the girl whom I later married, the novella “Women’s Economy.” – In what follows “Richard and Samuel” is meant. , which after all belongs more to Max, belongs to him at least to a greater extent, with a larger appendage, than one of his own, then after listening to Baum’s excellent piece “Competition,” in which dramatic force can be seen just as uninterruptedly at work and in its effect as in the product of a living craftsman, after listening to these two works I was so cast down and my inner self, already for several days rather empty, was filled, quite unprepared, with such heavy sorrow that on the way home I declared to Max that nothing could come of “Robert and Samuel.” For this declaration at that time not the slightest courage was needed, either toward myself or toward Max. The conversation that followed confused me a little, since “Robert and Samuel” was then by no means my chief concern and I therefore did not find the right answers to Max’s objections. But when I was then alone and not only the disturbance of my sorrow by the conversation, but also the almost always effective consolation of Max’s presence had fallen away, my hopelessness developed in such a way that it began to dissolve my thinking (here, while I am making a supper pause, Löwy comes into the apartment and disturbs me and delights me from seven o’clock until ten). Instead, however, of waiting at home to see what would happen next, I read in disorder two issues of “Aktion,” a little in “The Misfortunates” Novel by Wilhelm Schäfer. Kafka had great veneration for this author, who unfortunately later sympathized with the National Socialists. , finally also in my Paris notes, and lay down in bed, actually more content than before, but obdurate. It was similar a few days ago, when I came back from a walk in bright imitation of Löwy, with the force of his enthusiasm outwardly turned toward my goal. Then too I read and talked at home much all confused together and lapsed.

October 31. Although today I have read here and there in Fischer’s catalogue, in the Insel-Almanach, in the Rundschau, I am now fairly conscious of this, of having either taken everything firmly into myself or, to be sure, only fleetingly, but while warding off every injury. And I would trust myself enough for this evening, if I did not have to go out again with Löwy.

Before a marriage-broker, who was at our house this noon on account of a sister, I felt an embarrassment that pressed the eyes downward, arising from several reasons running into one another. The woman had a dress to which age, wornness and dirt gave a pale-gray shimmer. When she stood up, she kept her hands in her lap. She squinted, which apparently increased the difficulty of leaving her aside when I had to look over at my father, who asked me something about the young man being offered. On the other hand my embarrassment was diminished again by this, because I had my midday meal before me and even without embarrassment had been sufficiently occupied with making mixtures out of my three plates. In her face she had, as at first I saw only in sections, such deep wrinkles that I thought of the uncomprehending astonishment with which animals must look at such human faces. Strikingly bodily was the little nose, especially angular in its somewhat raised termination, stretched out from the face.

When on Sunday afternoon, just overtaking three women, I entered Max’s house, I thought: Still there are one, two houses in which I have something to do, still women who walk behind me can see me on a Sunday afternoon, for a piece of work, a conversation, purposeful, hurried, only exceptionally valuing it from this side, turn into a house doorway. It need not remain so for long.

I read the novellas of Wilhelm Schäfer, especially when reading aloud, with the same attentive enjoyment as if I were to draw a piece of string over my tongue. Valli I could at first not bear very well yesterday afternoon, but when I had lent her The Unfortunate Ones, when she had already been reading in it for a little while and must already have been properly under the influence of the story, I loved her because of this influence and caressed her.

In order not to forget it, in the event that my father should once again call me a bad son, I write down for myself that he, in front of a few relatives and without any particular occasion, whether now simply in order to press me down, or in order supposedly to save me, called Max a “meshuggene hothead,” and that yesterday, when Löwy was in my room, with an ironic shaking of the body and twisting of the mouth he spoke of strange people who are let into the apartment, what could be of interest in a strange person, why one should form such useless connections, and so on. – I ought not to have written it down after all, for I have fairly written myself into hatred against my father, for which he has given no occasion today after all and which, at least on account of Löwy, is disproportionately great in comparison with what I have written down as an utterance of my father’s, and which is increased still by the fact that I cannot remember the actually evil thing in Father’s behavior yesterday.

1 November. Today began to read Graetz’s History of Judaism greedily and happily. Because my longing for it had far outstripped the reading, it was at first stranger to me than I had thought, and I had to stop here and there in order, through rest, to let my Judaism gather itself. Toward the end, however, I was already seized by the imperfection of the first settlements in the newly conquered Canaan and by the faithful tradition of the imperfection of the men of the people (Joshua, the Judges, Eli).

Yesterday evening farewell to Frau Klug. We, I and Löwy, ran along the train and saw Frau Klug looking out in the dark behind a closed window of the last carriage. Quickly she stretched her arm toward us, still inside the compartment, stood up, opened the window, in which for a moment she stood broad, with her overcoat open, until opposite her the dark Herr Klug rose, who can only open his mouth wide and embittered and close it only tightly, as if forever. I spoke to Herr Klug only little in the fifteen minutes and perhaps looked at him only for two moments, otherwise, under weak, uninterrupted conversation, I could not turn my eyes away from Frau Klug. She was completely ruled by my presence, but more in her imagination than in reality. When she turned to Löwy with the recurring introduction: “You, Löwy,” she spoke for me, when she pressed herself against her husband, who sometimes left her only with her right shoulder at the window and pressed her dress and the puffed-out overcoat, she exerted herself to give me with it an empty sign.

The first impression, which I had at the performances, that I was not especially agreeable to her, will probably have been the correct one, she seldom called on me to sing along, when she did, then without good humor, when she asked me something, I unfortunately answered wrongly (“do you understand that?”, I said “yes”, but she wanted “no”, in order to answer, “I don’t either”), she did not offer me her picture postcards a second time, I preferred Frau Tschissik, to whom, to Frau Klug’s detriment, I wanted to give flowers. To this dislike, however, was added respect for my doctorate, which was not restrained by my childish appearance, indeed was rather increased by it. This respect was so great that out of her admittedly frequent, but not at all especially emphasized form of address “You know, Doctor” it sounded in such a way that I half unconsciously regretted deserving it far too little, and asked myself whether I did not have a claim to receive from everyone a precisely identical form of address. Since, however, I was so respected by her as a human being, I was so as a listener all the more. I shone when she sang, I laughed and looked at her, the whole time while she was on the stage, I sang the melodies along with her, later the words, I thanked her after a few performances; for that she could of course like me again. But if she addressed me out of this feeling, I was embarrassed, so that she surely returned with her heart to her first dislike and remained with it. All the more did she have to exert herself to reward me as a listener, and she did it gladly, since she is a vain actress and a good-natured woman.

Especially when she was silent up there at the compartment window, she looked at me with a mouth enraptured by embarrassment and cunning and with blinking eyes that swam on the folds coming from the mouth. She had to believe herself loved by me, as indeed it had also been true, and with these looks gave me the only fulfilment that she, as an experienced but young woman, good wife and mother, could give to a doctor of her imagination. These looks were so urgent and supported by turns of phrase such as: “there were such dear guests here, especially particular ones,” that I defended myself, and those were the moments in which I looked at her husband. I had, when I compared them both, a groundless astonishment at the fact that they were to travel away from us together and yet concerned themselves only with us and had no glance for one another. Löwy asked whether they had good seats; “yes, if it stays as empty as this,” answered Frau Klug and looked fleetingly into the interior of the compartment, whose warm air the man will spoil with his smoking. We spoke of their children, for whose sake they are going away; they have four children, among them three boys, the oldest is nine years old, they have not seen them for eighteen months already. When a gentleman nearby quickly got in, the train seemed to want to leave, we took leave in haste, shook one another’s hands, I raised my hat and then held it to my breast, we stepped back, as one does at the departure of trains, by which one wants to show that everything is over and that one has reconciled oneself to it. The train, however, did not yet leave, we stepped up again, I was quite glad of it, she asked after my sisters. Surprisingly the train slowly began to move. Frau Klug prepared her handkerchief for waving, I should write to her, she still called, whether I knew her address, she was already too far for me to have been able to answer her with words, I pointed to Löwy, from whom I could learn the address, that is good, she nodded quickly to me and to him and let the handkerchief flutter, I raised my hat, at first awkwardly, then, the farther away she was, the more freely.
